This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized
by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the
information in books and make it universally accessible.

Google books

https://books.google.com

HOOVER INSTITUTION
on War, Revolution, and Peace

FOUNDED BY HERBERT HOOVER, 1919

|

we

Honey Wissionary Saoviety,
Y

———< So

TEN YEARS’ REVIEW

OF

MISSION WORK

IN

MADAGASCAR.

488

1870—1880.

8

ANTANANARIVO: . “
THE LONDON MISSIONARY SOCIETY.

1880. i

(Tv

ANTANANARIVO.

ie

PRINTED AT THE: PRESS

OF THE

Honiton Whissionary Society,
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW

’ OF THE

MADAGASCAR MISSION.

PREPARED BY THE REV. B. BRIGGS, SECRE-
TARY OF THE IMERINA DISTRICT COMMITTEE
OF THE LONDON MISSIONARY SOCIETY, IN AC-
CORDANCE WITH THE SOCIETY’S REGULATIONS,
AND AT THE REQUEST OF THE COMMITTEE:

AFTERWARDS APPROVED BY THE EXECUTIVE
' SUB-COMMITTEE, AND PRINTED AT THE MISSION
PRESS, FOR THE USE OF THE DIRECTORS AND
THE MISSIONARIES.

ANTANANARIVO, SEPT. 30, 1880.
CONTENTS.

Trade (export and import) ........0e00-. cececcescececees”

STATISTICS. PAGE
TABLE OF CONTENTS...c.0.ecccscee cece secccterereevecssessceces We
MAP OF MADAGASCAR.
I BS 9 50) 9) 0 0 Wy (0) . I
CHAPTER I.—POLITICAL AND SOCIAL EVENTS ...ceeees- creeeree 3
I.—DMilitary operations ......... cece cece ee cee en ec eeees eves 6
European Drill-sergeants ............ ee ey
Reorganisation of the army and deka .......... 000058 .05e 8
Conscription ......cccce cece cece ence teeeee ceeees II
Gun-tax ... 2... ..eee eee eee ee tee eee eee Lae cee eneeeee 13
Military expeditions ............. fete eee eee eee ceneee 14
2.—General Administration ............ ceeeeees ceeeenee veeeee 17
Law reforms ........cecee ceeeee cece ee teteeee en enes 17
Sakaizam-bohitra (Friends of the Villages).....  .... Sa Ce)
Formation of a ministry and recall of the folo lahy...... . 22
Change of local governors ..... vee cece eee e ee een ees 24
BeSlavery weccesecesces ee cen eeee: sa deereesces scene sevees 25
Liberation of the Mozambiques............. cece ee ceeeee 26
Domestic slavery ............+. Leet ee bee beeen te eeee 27
4.—Intoxicating Drinks ...... sete ee eer eaten oneness vesesss BI
5.—Revival of the ‘‘Tangena’’ and other superstitions seen eeees 34
“6.—Epidemics ........ seeeee- sete teen ee ater arene ce ee teens 39
7.—Visits of the Queen to Betsileo and Ambohimanga 44
8.—Various other signs of political and social progress.......... 48
Amelioration of /anomZoana (government service)......... 49
Printing of RAbary ..cccececee cece cone cece eeeneeee 50
Houses oe. ece eee cee cece cee n en ete ee eee seen es ceeeeee 51
Roads ..eeece cece seer cees coe caer cee een cece es ceees 52
Manners and dress .....- 0 .-eses caeeeeee seeeeeceeeeees 52
General morality ....... ...s..... tee eneeene ae seeseees 53
Observance of the Sabbath.................. sents cacees 56
vi. CONTENTS.

PAGE

CHAPTER II].—OTHER EVENTS AFFECTING THE INTERESTS OF THE
MISSION ...0...0 ceeees ceceeceueeeeueeeees kee ceaeececeseeees 59
1.—The last appeal of the Rev. W. Ellis on behalf of Madagascar. 60
2.—The visit of the Deputation.... ....... «2... se sesescccecee OF
3-—The Missionary Conference........... eee eee cece eee cee 64
4.—The Issue of the Shilling Bible in 1874.. ern.)

5-—Correspondence in the English Newspapers on affairs in Ma-
Aagascar .... 66. cece cece eee cee ceetceceeees voveere 69

6.—Intrigues of the Jesuit priests. ee eee ee cee et eeeeeeeeeece 76
7.—Deputation from the Society of Friends ............00-..26 80

CHAPTER IIJ.—THE EXTENSION OF THE MISSION ...ccce .cesee- 81

1.—The Betsileo Mission............ seeccececccccececccccesess 83

2.—The Antsihanaka Mission ..... .cceee seceeesecs casecee. 88
3-—The Iboina Mission ........0 wees. ceaeee wee eee cee wee 7
4-—The Imerina Mission ..............00008 eee eee eeeen ee +. 102

5.—Distant stations occupied by native evangelists..........e00. I10

CHAPTER IV.—THE NATIVE CHURCHES AND EVANGELISTIC WORK. 115

1.—The Palace Church ..........ecee eee oe wee eee cee ceeees IES
2.—The Town Churches ...........005 0 sees ea cee ce ceeeeees 124
3- —The Suburban Churches ..... ee eee cee ees faces cee eeeee 128
4.—The Country Churches ............... Lee eeer ee reees eevee 129
5.—Native Pastors ...... fe cece eee eee eeeee ae see ec eee anes 133
6.—Native Preachers ........ccceecscec cscs ven cetene casves ve 137
7.—Native Evangelists ........0. ceeee weeee cece tveeeeee ees 140
8.—Government of the Churches .............205 see cece eee 143
g-—Conduct of Public worship ........ cee esccee cee eee ee cone 145
10.—Chapel Building .. .......... 26.008. eee eee ee eeeee . 147
11.—Church Unions and Native Missionary Societies ........... 152
12.— Visits to distant parts of the Island ..... wee eee eee eee oe 156

A Comparative Table of Church Statistics from 1870 ‘to 1880 1 58

CHAPTER V.—THE DISTRICTS OF IHE IMERINA MISSION: with

Map of the Districts................ ee ee tee eens cece tec eeeeees 159
1.—The Ambatonakanga District............... cece ee cece 161
2.—The Amparibe and Ambohidratrimo District ................ 162
3-—The Analakely District ....... eee eeee cee ceeeeeeneeee 164

4.—The Ambohipotsy District ..... see seeeerecens see eens oe 165
Im Imerina ....000 cece et cece ene sececcee cece caee store

CONTENTS. vii.
PAGE.
5.—The Tsiafahy District .... ... 0.2.40 Stee eee ea eees 167
6.—The Ankadibevava and Ambatomanga District....... Places 168
7.—The Ambohitantely District ........... nna © 0)
8.—The Ampamarinana District ........ ..cces ceeerees sevecee IZ
g-—The Ambohibeloma District ................ vee secon nes 173
10.—The Andohalo District ............ cceees cecseceseecececcee 175
11.—The Isoavina District ... .......... 0665 ce eeees Leveeeevees 176
12.—The Faravohitra District...... I © oy
13.-—The Ambohimanga District .. ....... cee cece eee ee veces 179
14.—The Vonizongo District .......... oe eeeees eee ce eee een eees 180
CHAPTER VI.—EDUCATION 1... 0... cece eee cee ee cece seeeee. 182
1.—Educational Institutions in Antananarivo ... .. te ote e eens 183
The College ....... se eseee ce cece ee eeceee cece ecans vee 183
The Normal School ............. eee eeeee eet e ee ee eens 192
The Girls’ Central School .............. eee ee veces eee 196
The Palace School ...... 0 .sceces cece cece ence ee ee cecnes 203
The Sunday School .............005. nee e ee cee eens 204
The Young Men’s Christian Association ......... ...... 205
2.—Educational Institutions in Fianarantsoa ......6. eee sees ee 206
The Normal School .......... 0... cc cece ce cece ee ee eeeeee 207
The Girls’ Central School ...............0. sence ee eeeeee 207
The Young Men’s Christian Association .. ........+.0. 207
Classes for Preachers ..........cccecee. ceeeec eee ceeece 208
3-—Elementary Education . sae scenes eqeees 209
Report by the Superintendents of Education : with Statistics 210
Extracts from the Reports of the Missionaries ............ 228
Elementary Education in Betsileo ...........+.66 wees 234

A Comparative Table of General School Statistics from
1870 tO 1880 1... 0. cece eee cece eee crete en cee eee neee 236
CHAPTER VII.—LITERATURE ......-. ccecseen conc teenes sees cesses 237
1.—Bible Revision ....... ween tee e ee eee eee ceeeees eeaeee +. 237
Report by the Principal Reviser ........ .c0000 see eeeees 238
1.—General Literature................ eee ee cee eee teensy 242
Report by the Superintendent of the Press...............5 245
Bible Circulation from 1871 to 1880 ........... 0.2... . 247

List of Books published at the L. M. S. Printing Office
from Jan. 1, 1871, to Aug. 31, 1880... . 248
CHAPTER VIII.—MEDICAL WORK ......cc0 cceccccccccuccencs aces 257

258
viii. CONTENTS.

PAGE
CHAPTER VIII.—MEDICAL WorK.—Continued.
In Betsileo ........ ccc cee cece cece ee ct eee tec ees tees cee 261
In Antsihanaka............ Lee ec cee e cece eetecscecseces 202
In Tooina oe ee cee eee teens tee eee tees 263

CHAPTER IX.—THE WORK OF THE FRIENDS’ FOREIGN MISSION
ASSOCIATION......0. 000055 vee ee eens cee ee Fee rene cenaee eens 264
Report by the Secretary of the Friends’ Committee .............. 264

CHAPTER X.—THE WORK OF OTHER SOCIETIES .......-seee00e- 280
1.—The Norwegian Missionary Society ......... se ceeees 280
Report by the Superintendent of the N. M. ‘S.. ... 282

2.—The Society for the Propagation of the Gospel ......... eee. 285
3-—The Jesuit Mission ..... fence enter eee rene ncenancacene ss 289

CHAPTER ‘XJ.—ENGLISH MISSIONARIES veces ceceeesecrececsess 291

Number, Changes, etc feet eee eee e cece eees ce eeee eens eeceee ne 291
Obituary ...... cece ccc ee ccc r ee rer cec cece eset erence os wee 295
Table shewing length of service of each missionary .... .. .... 299

List of English Missionaries in 1880  ...... 66. ceseeeeecee seve 300
Table.—Deaths of Missionaries since 1870 ...........eeeseeees 301
Table.—Deaths of Children of Mission Families since 1870 ...... 301

CHAPTER XII.—PROSPECTIVE WORK........ see e eee e ete tee eeeee 302

Summary of work accomplished so... cee eee eee ee eee e te eens 303
Work remaining to be done ........ cece cece eet e ee cece cess ee 305
Things to be kept in view ......eecee cece cece eee cece cece sens 309
Literary work .......... 0.5006 Lee ceeeee cece. 309
A higher standard of Scripture knowledge on the part of
the country pastors and preachers ..........seeeeees 310
A higher tone of spiritual life in the churches .... ... ++ 310
The independence of the churches ...... ........-.000 31
A better system of education .........cee ceecessoucseee SII
. The slave question .............0.5 se teeccecercce rece 312

ae pe

List OF ENGLISH BOOKS AND PAMPHLETS ON MADAGASCAR
PUBLISHED SINCE 1870... .66 -. cece seceseececees essen eeeeeee 314

LISTS OF COMMITTEES, CtC. 00. wccccec vere cece seve vesesees 316

LisT oF NATIVE PASTORS AND TRAINED EVANGELISTS .......... 318
Ge Healagascae Hessioy,

TEN YEARS’ REVIEW.
- 4870—1880.

00900 0-eme

INTRODUCTION.
HIS Review of Mission Work in Madagascar from 1870,
to 1880, is prepared in accordance with a regulation
of the London Missionary. Society, requiring that a general
review of each of its missions shall be supplied every. tenth
year by the District Committees. In addition to the obliga-
tion placed upon them by this regulation, the missionaries,
in Madagascar consider that a review of the events and work
of the past ten years will be of great service, both in stimu-
lating their own zeal, and in deepening the interest which
is felt in the Madagascar Mission, whether by. the Directors
of the Society, or by the Christian public at large. The
numerous events that have taken place in Madagascar since
1870 are of a varied character, and some of them are of such
importance as to make a faithful record and impartial review
of them highly desirable; and such a record and review
will, we are sure, be greatly appreciated by all who take
an interest in the temporal and spiritual well-being of the
Malagasy people.

In preparing this Review it is our purpose ta record, as
faithfully as possible, all events, of whatever nature, that.
have taken place in Madagascar within the time specified, and
which have had a bearing, directly or indirectly, on mission-
ary work, either as hindering or as fostering its progress.
2 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

In doing this, we hope to place before our readers the
results of missionary work as already realised, and to enable
them to form an approximately correct idea of the great
work which still remains to be done in Madagascar before
the whole of its people is won for Christ. In order that our
purpose may be satisfactorily accomplished, it will be neces-
sary to pass under review all events, proceedings, and
institutions that have affected the political, social, and
religious condition of the country since our last decennial
Review was published. Some of the matters which will
claim special notice are the repeated attempts of the Queen
and Prime Minister to improve the administration of the
laws and the general government of the country; military
operations ; laws and proclamations with regard to slavery ;
the use and influence of intoxicating drinks; epidemics and
native superstitions ; royal processions to different parts of
the country; increase of trade (import and export); ame-
lioration of fanompoana (government service); and various
other signs of progress visible in the houses, dress, and
manners of the people. There are also some events, not
connected with the native Government, but specially and
directly affecting the interests of the Mission, which will
need to be remembered, such as, the visits of the Deputations
from the London Missionary Society and the Society of
Friends, the issue of the shilling Bible, the correspondence
on affairs in Madagascar which appeared in the English
Independent and other English newspapers, and the intrigues
of the Jesuit priests. In addition to these events, the work
of the missionaries in its various departments will claim
special attention, including the establishment of new Missions
and the strengthening of the Mission in Imerina, the character
and government of the native churches, evangelistic work,
education (special and general) as carried on at the various
mission stations and throughout the country, Bible revision
and general literature, medical work in Antananarivo, Fiana-
rantsoa, and other places. The work of other Societies, now
labouring in Madagascar, will also need to be referred to.
This Review is also accompanied by a Sketch Map and
Tables of Statistics, which will help to illustrate the written
statements,
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. | 3

- We wish it also to be understood that in writing this
Review it will be our endeavour conscientiously to report
things in their true light. We have no intention of laying
ourselves open to the complaint which is sometimes made
against missionary reports, that they present only the bright
and cheery side, whilst the dark and discouraging one is
kept in the background. We may have failures to report
as well as successes, and we wish them all to be known to
our friends, that they may not be misled, and think better
of the missionaries and their work than they deserve. We
are conscious of personal imperfections, and of defects in
our work. We know that many of the churches of which we
have care, and many of the people among whom we live, are
far from what they ought to be. We are also aware that
part of what has been done has not been so successful as it
ought to have been, and some things which we desired should
be done have been omitted. All these things will doubtless
be clearly stated in the following pages, not, however, in
the way of complaint, or with a feeling of despondency, but
simply that we may be faithful in our statement of facts, and
that our friends may have a true idea of the weakness as
well as the strength of our Mission. After all these things
have been fairly considered, and full allowance has been
‘made for any omissions and failures that may have occurred,
we are sure that the uppermost feeling in the hearts, both
of the missionaries and of all who take an interest in their
work, will be one of thankfulness to God that so much has
been accomplished in His name, and of courage and hope
with regard to the future.

—=—_><o07S———

CHAPTER I.

POLITICAL AND SOCIAL EVENTS.
9G
HERE is perhaps no better evidence of the hold, or other-
wise, which Christianity has upon a community than is
to be found in the improvement of the laws by which that com-
munity is governed, and in the manner in which the people
eonduct themselves under the political and social events. which,
from time to'time, take place'among them. Individual Christ-
ianity is tested: by the personal character and conduct of that
man: or woman whe is the'subject of it, but the hold which the
Gospel may' have secured on: the community at large must be
evidenced by something mere public and general. It is by
the influence of Christian truth on individuals that the masses
are prepared to adopt and! carry out any public measure
which may be based on Christian principles, or to conduct
themselves in a Christian manner under any public calamity.
When, however, Christian teaching has been uninterruptedly:
carried on for some time, it often requires some public event
to test the individual character, and to reveal the extent to
which the truth has taken hold upon the multitade; and
happy is that nation which is possessed of rulers sufficiently
wise and Christian to understand the signs of the times, and
to enable them opportunely to promulgate such measures as
shall be for the public good, and for the further extension of
truth and righteousness. Madagascar has possessed such
times of quiet teaching and preparation, and has also witnessed
times of severe trial and testing. We are also thankful
to say that it is now possessed of wise and Christian rulers,
who have been able repeatedly, and sometimes most oppor-
tunely, to inaugurate such reforms and promulgate such laws
as have promoted the general welfare of the nation; and,
though some of these have not yet produced alt the good they
ate calculated and were intended to produce, we doubt not
that in course of time their fruits will be fully realised.

In Madagascar, more perhaps than in some other countries,
the progress of Christianity has not only been marked, but
has also been greatly aided, by the action of the ruling powers,
and by such political reforms as have, from time to time, been
inaugurated. This is probably to be accounted for by the
patriarchal form of government, and by the hereditary habit
of the people to lean on the central authority, and follow the
instructions thence received. We do not believe, however,
that the progress of Christianity in Madagascar is to be
attributed solely to this cause; for we have had abundant
evidence to the contrary. The continued spread of the truth
during the whole of the long and austere reign of Ranava-
‘TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 5

lona I., notwithstanding all tkat-was done ‘to hinder it, .shews
that the kingdom of Christ can flaurish in Madagascar
as truly, if not as extensively, beneath :the ‘frowns ,as under
the smiles of ‘royalty. The reign .of Queen Raseherina
(1863-1868) was also.a time when Christianity was barely
tolerated, and when‘its teachers were rather hindered than
aided by those;in authority. -But.it was, chiefly, during these
two reigns that the foundation of the Church of -Christ in
Madagascar was laid. The harvest which has been reaped
since then is, to a great extent, the fruit. of the seed sown at
that time. During the last: twelve years, ‘however, the preach-
ing and teaching of the Gospel ‘have been greatly aided ,by
the example and influence of thase occupying the highest
positions in the country. The Queen -has been a :nursing
mother to.the Church, and the Prime Minister has acted as a
father, whilst others in authority have also used their influence,
and. given of their substance, to extend the, kingdom. of Christ
in the island. Without anything in the form of a -state
church, .as the term is usually understood, and .whilst .the
freedom. of the Church has ever been recognised as sacred,
the highest rulers in the country have been fellow-workers
with the missionaries and the native pastors and teachers,
and have always taken an active interest in all that concerned
the temporal and spiritual welfare of the people. Most
of the political reforms and social improvements that have
taken place during the last ten years have been.originated
by the Queen and Prime Minister themselves, and .have, we
believe, been prompted by the highest Christian principle—
love to God and man—thus witnessing to the power of the
Gospel of Christ. It is on this account that we have thought
it well to appropriate the first chapter of this Review to a
record of the political and social events. that have taken place
in Madagascar since 1870, and we regard all the good arising
from them as the indirect blessings of Christianity.

It should be remembered that at the close of 1870, Queen
Ranavalona II. had been reigning a little more than two years
and a half.* Previous to that time, a number of important
events had taken place. The ceremonies at the coronation

* Reign began April.2, 1868.
6 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

had shewn, unmistakably, that the Queen had become a
Christian, and that she intended to reign as a Christian
sovereign. The idols had been discarded and burned. The
Sunday markets had been changed to some other day, and
all government work had been stopped on the Sunday. A
religious service had been begun in the Palace. The Queen and
the Prime Minister had been baptised. The foundation stone
ofa Chapel Royal had been laid within the Palace enclosure ;
and several other events had also shewn that the old things
were passing away, and that all things were becoming new.
The subsequent events which we now proceed to record may
be conveniently arranged under suitable heads.
1.—MILITARY OPERATIONS.—Military affairs have ever
occupied a prominent position in the conduct of the Malagasy
Government, and repeated efforts have been made to improve
the condition of the army. From the time of Andrianampoini-
merina and Radama I., by whose influence the Hova rule
was widely extended, and the whole island came to be
regarded as but one kingdom, it has been considered neces-
sary to maintain, as efficiently as possible, a comparatively
large army; and for this purpose much energy and large
sums of money have, from time to time, been expended.
During the five years of Queen Rasoherina’s reign, however,
no special efforts were made in this direction, and the army
became less efficient than formerly, while some of the tribes,
only nominally under Hova authority, became restless and
threatening. Since the accession of the present Queen, mili-
tary affairs have taken up a large share of the time and
attention of the Government. . This has been considered .
necessary (1) because of the impaired and inefficient con-
dition of the army, there having been no new recruits for
several years past, and many of the old soldiers being
utterly incapable of further service; (2) because some of
the distant tribes were constantly assuming a more unsettled
and threatening attitude, and repeatedly making advances
into neighbouring provinces, carrying off the cattle, and
sometimes the people also; and (3, because it was deemed
imperative to the peace and prosperity of the island that the
central authority should keep up an appearance of strength,
and maintain an army in sufficient force and equipment to
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 7

overawe the turbulent tribes, and put down any rebellion
that might arise. It has sometimes been said that one object
of the Malagasy Government in increasing and strengthening
their military establishment is that they may be able to repel
an attack by the French, or other European nation, which
should seek to possess the island; but this is purely
imaginary, as the more intelligent of the Malagasy know well
that the strongest army they might raise would scarcely
suffice to check any European power, which should, impelled
by lust of territorial aggrandisement, determine on taking
possession of their country.

In 1872, the Malagasy authorities applied to the Governor
of Mauritius for an English drill-sergeant. This application
was readily agreed to, and an English officer was sent to
Antananarivo, the native Government undertaking all ex-
penses incurred. A number of young men, sons of the
highest families in the island, were placed under this officer
for training, and, when sufficiently qualified, were themselves
appointed to drill the rest of the soldiers, and the recruits
who afterwards joined the army. . This English officer re-
mained in Madagascar about two years, and was then
replaced by another, who was also sent from Mauritius on
the same terms as the first one. This second officer remained
about three years, and had another company of young men
under his care for the same purpose as before. By this
means the army was supplied with a number of young native
officers well qualified to act as drill-masters, so that foreign
help was no longer so much needed. During the residence
of the second English drill-sergeant, the French Consul,
evidently a little jealous of the honour paid to English
officers, procured a young French officer from Bourbon,
and offered his services to the native Government. This
offer was accepted, through fear, probably, lest a refusal
should give offence to the French. Thus for some
time both the English and the French drill were being
taught simultaneously in Antananarivo to soldiers com-
posing the same army. The absurdity of this arrangement
‘soon became evident. Both the European drill-sergeants
left the island nearly about the same time, and the
work of drilling the troops thus devolved entirely on the
8 THE ‘MADAGASCAR ‘MISSION.

young ‘native officers, who, for a ‘time, continued to teach the
drill'in which they had been trained—some in English and
some in French. In July, 1878, a great military review took
place at Imahamasina, the large level plain west of the
Capital. This teview extended over three days, during which
time all other‘public business was suspended, the Queen and
Prithe Minister, with all the officials in the town, being at
the review from morning till evening. Each company was
reviewed separately, and went through every exercise they
had previously learned. The general verdict after this re-
view was, that those soldiers who had been trained by the
English officers and their pupils acquitted themselves far
more satisfactorily than those who had been trained by the
French officer from Bourbon. A short time after this, the
Prime Minister, who is also Commander-in-Chief, seeing the
inadvisability of two systems of drill with the words of
command in different languages, determined to have all
the soldiers placed under the same system, and to have the
words of conimand translated into appropriate Malagasy.
This ‘was arranged, chiefly by the Prime Minister himself,
and has been successfully carried out by the young native
officers, under his guidance and supervision.

For many months during the year 1876, especially in the
months of June, July, and August, great excitement pre-
vailed in Imerina, and to some extent in other parts of
the country also, on account’ of the measures taken by
the Government for the reorganisation of the army and
deka.* For several months, nearly all other work, includ-
ing school and Bible-class teaching, was brought to a
standstill through the calling up of all the soldiers and
officers to Antananarivo. Many ofthe country congregations
were also very much reduced, and some of them were stop-
ped altogether, most of the pastors and preachers being
detained in the Capital. Unfounded reports were also widely
circulated in the country, to the effect that the Queen
had given up the “praying,” and was about to return to

* The word deka is the native contraction of the French azde-de-cam#,
and is used by the Malagasy with a similar meaning, though with a wi er
application.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 9

the idolatrous ‘ciistoins of her ancestors. These reports were
readily laid hold of by the people ata distance from the
Capital, and ‘made an excuse for -not assembling for ‘worship
on Sundays. Themanner in whith the Government'conducted
the business at this time necessarily extended it over many
months. This was, however, in harmony with the political and
social customs of the country; and, considering all the
circumstances of the case and the nature of.the business to be
attended ‘to, it was, perhaps, impossible for it:‘to'be done in a
mote expeditious way. Still, one could not help ‘regretting
that the Governmerit had not some'better and quicker mode
of despatching public business, so as not to unsettle the
whole country, and put a stop to every other department of
work.

At the time of the events now under consideration, a mili-
tary conscription had for some time been talked about and
anxiously expected, but two preliminary matters required to
be attended to before the proposed conscription could be
carried out. One was the reorganisation of the existing
army, involving the rearrangement of officers and brigades,
and the discharge of old and worn-out soldiers; and the
other was the reorganisation of the deka, which of late years
had fallen into considerable disorder, most of the higher
officers having appropriated to themselves a much larger
number of followers and personal attendants than they had
any right to have, and whom they used for their own personal
interests and aggrandisement. Both these measures, but
especially the latter, were of the highest importance to the
Government and the country, and required great wisdom and
firmness on the part of the Prime Minister. His action with
regard to them was watched with the greatest interest, both
by Europeans and natives. It was seen that by successfully
carrying his points, the Prime Minister would greatly
strengthen his own position and authority, and establish the
present Government on a firmer basis than ever by weakening
the power of all the chief officers; whereas, a false step might
have landed the country in a revolution, which would proba-
bly have ended only with his life. We are thankful to be
able to say that all ended well, and, we believe, with. great ©
to THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

advantage to the country. The first public kabary* that was
made on this subject was at Imahamasina, on the 6th of June,
1876. The Queen’s Message was addressed to the Foloalin-
dahy,+ and was read by the Prime Minister. The following
is a translation of the principal clauses :—

This is what I say to you Foloalindahy: you see and know your present
condition, and I shall rearrange you, and therefore inform you [of my
purpose]. I have also informed the Amdanzlanitra who are your fathers
and mothers. And you also who have defa, write them all down, both
those that have been with you from the time of Rabodonandrianampoini-
merina (Ranavalona I.), and those who have more recently joined you.
I give you a fortnight to write them, and then you must send in their
numbers, and I shall not consider any one [who complies with this order]
as having done wrong and deserving of punishment, whoever he may be,
who possesses more than he ought to have, or who possesses some and yet
ought not to have any; and I have also given orders for your fathers and
mothers to write them as well. But on the other hdnd, should any one
leave out any of his deka and fail to write them all, and I afterwards find
from your fathers and mothers, or from the officers in the army, that this
has been done, especially if bribes have been given, then I shall hold him
as guilty, and deserving of punishment.

And this also I say to you who are pastors and teachers: write down
-the names of the scholars in every village, and put separately the diligent
and the lazy. Write also the names of those who call themselves scholars,
but do not learn ; and especially those, who, when they hear this my word
causing all the scholars to be written, shall send their children to school,
you shall also write, but separately. And if you should not write them
carefully according to my word, but should put the lazy among the
diligent, and those who have recently entered the school with the old
scholars, then I shall hold you as guilty and deserving of punishment.
Let them all be distinctly written according to my order, and I, their
Queen, will consider what shall be done with them.

This latter clause, though referring to the schools, was quite
in keeping with the former one about the deka, both having
relation to the reorganisation of the army, and being prepara-
tory to the purposed conscription. The Queen’s Message also
contained a reference to the slave question, which we shall
have occasion to mention in another part of this Review.

* A kabary is a public proclamation or message, but the word is also
used of an assembly convened for the transaction of public business.

+ The Poloalindahy are the army, literally: the ten ten-thousand, or

the hundred thousand, men.
'  -{ The Ambantlanitra are all the subjects of the Queen, including the
Foloalindahy.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. II

After the Royal Proclamation had been delivered, the Prime
Minister, in a long and earnest speech, recapitulated the
various matters referred to, and enforced them upon the people
in his usually eloquent manner, adding such advice of his
own as seemed suitable to the occasion.

Another public kasary with regard to the deka was made at
Andohalo on the 13th of July, 1876, after the numbers
possessed by each officer had been sent into the Government,
according to the Queen’s word given at Imahamasina on the
6th of June. The second kabary was addressed to the Ambant-
lanttra and the Foloalindahy, and was brought and delivered
by the Prime Minister. The Royal Message was long, and
shewed the importance attached to the business under consider-
ation. After giving a historical account of the origin of the
army and the institution of the deka, Her Majesty condemned, -
in very strong language, the recent action of many of the
officers in changing the customs of the ancestors, and impair-
ing the government service, by withdrawing young men from
the army and other departments, and attaching them to them-
selves as their own private followers. The address concluded
by fixing the number of deka which each officer was entitled to
possess, and by declaring that, in future, any one exceeding
that number would be treated as a transgressor of the law.
The number of deka allowed is regulated, in each case, by the
honours of the officer, which also indicate his social position
and official standing. The highest number which any one
can possess is thirty, and this is only legal in the case of
officers of the highest rank, viz., of 16 honours. Those of 15
honours are allowed 25, 14 honours 20, 13 honours 15, 12
honours 10, 11 honours 5, 10 honours 3, and g honours only
one ; the rest are not allowed any.

After the business of the deka had been satisfactorily
arranged, and when the large number of young men, who
had been illegally detained in this service, had been placed
in their proper positions in the army, and had sufficiently
mastered their military exercise, as shewn by the reviews
at Imahamasina (July 9-12, 1878), then the long-delayed
conscription began to be seriously considered by the Govern-
ment, and to be anxiously expected by the people. Great
12 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

excitement prevailed throughout the central provinces, at this
time, a. military conscription being regarded .as about the
worst calamity that could -possibly happen. There shad
previously been no conscription in Madagascar since the reign
of Ranavalona I., and the arbitrary ‘manner in which ithe
business was then conducted, with the hitherto oppressive
character of military service, had produced in the minds of the
people a great dread of any recurrence of such an event. The
missionaries also were not without their fears as to what
might be the effect of the movement on elementary education,
and on mission work generally. The people had long been
inclined to regard the schools as mere nurseries for the
army, and to suspect the missionaries of working hand in glove
with the Government in this matter; and if, in spite of all
that had been told them to the contrary, it had turned out
that the youths in the schools were among the first to be taken
as soldiers, the educational work throughout the country
would have received a severe check, and it would have taken
many years’ labour to remedy the disastrous effects. The
churches, too, being closely associated with the schools, would
have suffered considerably. Such being the case, it is not to
be wondered at that the interest and excitement became
intense as the time for the great event drew near.

Early in the morning of the 25th of March, 1879, the boom-
ing of artillery announced that an event of importance was
about to take place. This continued at intervals till about
the middle of the forenoon, when the Prime Minister made
his appearance, attended by all the principal. officers, and
bringing the Royal Message, which he-read in the presence
of the assembled multitude. The -Proclamation was well
received by the people, and gave much greater satisfaction
than could possibly have been expected. The following
extract, from the Report of the Madagascar Mission for 1879,
shews the nature of this 4abary, and the principles on which
the new conscription was based as compared with the past :—

The word of the Queen, and the new military regulations, shew a decided
advance upon anything of the kind that has hitherto taken place in
Madagascar, and, if the country is to have an army at ail, we do not know
that it could be formed ona better system, taking into consideration the
circumstances of the people, than.that. which has now been adopted. The
following ane-the principal features of the new syatem as compared: with
the. old. one = (1) not the:poor only, but all classes are required ta serve,
none: being exempt, except (a) the sick and incapable, (4) pastors of
churches who have been duly appointed and recognised, and (c) such as
the Queen shail be pleased to free ; (2) instead of service for life, the: time
of service is fixed at five years, while those who are diligent, and. acquire
the necessary, qualifications: before the expiration of that time, will be
treated, with special favour; (3) in. future, the. enrolment of new soldiers
will not be at irregular intervals, as formerly, but will take place annually ;
(4) the soldiers will no longer be called up to the Capital for drill, but will
be drilled in their own districts, by duly appointed drill-masters ; (5) they
will no more be'sent into distant parts of the island for life, but for twelve
months. only, so that there will be a constant interchange. of companies
thoughout the country ; and (6) a number of regulations. are: given, with a
view to prevent oppression, bribery, and deception; and fines, varying
from ten to a hundred dollars, are imposed on any one who may be found
guilty of any of these misdemeanours. With regard to the schools, which
is that part ofthe scheme that touches our work most closely, it is enacted:
(1) that they shall not be disturbed in the first instance, hut that afterwards
the Queen will take measures to find out who are worthy of heing scholars ;
(2) that after the business of the conscription is finished, all children, from
seven years of age and upwards, shall be compelled to learn, and that
parents keeping back their children shall be fined three dollars for each
child so kept back; and (3) that in the meantime no new scholars shall be
received, and those who have left shall not be readmitted, under a penalty
of fifty dollars. The immediate effect of these regulations on our schools
was to clear out some of the most lazy scholars, who saw no hope of gain
by further attendance, and thus the number of scholars was reduced, no
new ones being received to fill the places of those who left; but at the
same time there was an increase of diligence on the part of many, who
were evidently hoping that the time of their reward was at hand.

Immediately after this kabary, large numbers of young men
came up to the Capital from various parts of the country,
and enrolled themselves as soldiers. These were at once
placed under drill according to the new regulations, and on
the 8th of January, 1880, a review of these new recruits
was held at Imahamasina, in the presence of the Queen, and
was declared to be highly satisfactory.

The next step, in carrying out the scheme of military
improvements, was the levying of a gun-tax. This had been
foreseen for some time, as the Government stock of guns was
both very poor and very limited. The measure was also
undertaken with the full consent, and even at the request, of
the people, so that no dissatisfaction was created by it in
14 THE .MADAGASCAR MISSION.

the country. The tax was levied on the 3oth of January, and
four months were allowed for the payment of it. The levying
of this tax was as follows :—for three slaves, one dollar (one
shilling and fourpence each); for six cattle, one shilling
(twopence each); persons having neither slaves nor cattle to
pay twopence each, the poor and destitute, however, being free,
only requiring to have their names registered. Any one
not paying the tax on the slaves or cattle in his possession
is liable to have them confiscated. It was also enacted, that
any one who, through love of his country, should wish to
present a free-will offering, in addition to paying his ordinary
tax, should be at liberty to do according to his own will, and
in return should receive a paper, containing a notification
of the offering made in the name of the Queen, which could
be handed down to his descendants as a memento of the
good he had done to the kingdom. By this means a large
sum of money was obtained.

There is another event which, although it took place
before some of those already mentioned, may be conveniently
referred to here, viz., the sending out of two military expedi-
tions to the south-west of the island. It has already been
stated that at the time of the accession of the present Queen,
and for some time afterwards, there was considerable dis-
quiet among some of the Sakalava tribes, who were only in
nominal subjection to Hova rule, some of them even claiming
absolute independence. In 1873, several tribes in the south-
west had become so turbulent and daring, that it became
necessary for the Government to adopt some active measures
in order to prevent. further difficulties. A series of cattle
robberies had been perpetrated, and compensation had
been refused. Under the circumstances, the Government
appeared to have no alternative but to enforce submission,
and, with this purpose, arrangements were made for sending
out two military expeditions. Such expeditions, though they
had not been of frequent occurrence during the previous few
years, yet were by no means unknown in Madagascar.
Viewed, therefore, in themselves, there was nothing remark-
able in the expeditions which were sent off at this time.
But circumstances had considerably changed since any event
ofa similar kind had taken place. The Queen and Prime
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 15

Minister had been baptised. Most of the officers who were
in command of the expeditions, as well as many of the
soldiers composing them, were members of Christian churches.
All former military expeditions, moreover, had been charac-
terised by great wickedness, cruelty, and injustice. It was,
therefore, a matter of considerable interest, both to the
missionaries and to others, as to how war under these
altered circumstances would be conducted. The result, we
are happy to say, proved satisfactory to the most anxious
observer. ‘Two expeditions were organised, and were headed
by two of the chief officers in the Government. The
two forces together numbered five thousand soldiers, in
addition to a large number of aides-de-camp and personal
followers. Among them were several of the chief native
pastors, and also many of the native preachers and teachers.
Before they started, they were addressed by the Queen and
Prime Minister, and reminded of their position as Christians,
and of their duties as soldiers in the service of a Christian
Queen, who wishes to do what is just and right, and to “rest
her kingdom upon God.” They were told not to take idols
with them, as their fathers had done when sent on similar
business, but to put their trust in God, and in their dealings
with the enemy to do their best to settle all disputes honour-
ably and without bloodshed. This advice was received, and |
faithfully acted upon by the officers in charge. From the
numerous reports we have received of these expeditions, we
have reason to believe that they were conducted in an
honest, honourable, and straightforward manner. The con-
duct of the officers and men towards each other in the camp,
and during their long journey; their dealings with the
people after they had arrived in the enemy’s country; the
manner in which they endeavoured to settle the questions in
dispute; and the general management of the expeditions—
all seem to have been characterised by a Christian spirit,
and calculated to recommend the new religion to those who
have, as yet, but little knowledge of it. The object of the
Government in sending these expeditions, was not to obtain
fresh territory, or new glory, or in any way to enrich them-
selves by the spoils of the enemy, but simply to protect those
tribes which had been cruelly oppressed and robbed. The
16 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

officers in charge of the expeditions appointed trustworthy.men.
as. overseers of the camps to, prevent disorder and unfairness,
and especially to.take care that none of the officers should give
extra burdens, consisting: of their own baggage or provisions,
to: be carried by those who were. under their authority. Strict
orders were given that no acts of violence or oppression. on
the people along the line of road, through whose villages. or
markets the expeditions might have to pass, would be allowed ;
guards. were usually: stationed at these places.to see that the.
orders. were obeyed; and any one found guilty of disobedience
in any of these matters was severely punished. Before, the
expeditions left the Capital, the Queen and Prime Minister
placed a, sum of money in the hands of the chief officers, for
the purpose of relieving the sufferings of the sick, and for: the.
help of any who. might be in want by the way; the ten city
churches also contributed to this fund; many Christians. also,
gave money privately, some supplying medicines as well; col-.
lections were also made in the camp every Sunday, especially,
on the first Sunday of the month, for the same purpose; many
of the pastors, preachers, and others in the expeditions acted
as nurses of the sick and dispensers of medicine; and great
kindness was usually shewn to any one who was ill, sometimes
an officer would give up his palanquin to a poor soldier who,
was too ill to walk, he himself occasionally becoming one of
the bearers. When treating withthe enemy, the officers in
charge of the expeditions, whilst anxious to uphold the
honour. and dignity of their Queen, never browbeat or.
bullied, but in calm persuasive language endeavoured to win
them over. Though conscious of their strength, they did not
use it for purposes of oppression or plunder. All they sought.
was that the enemy should acknowledge their errors, and
engage to observe the laws and authority of the Queen.
One of the expeditions, on account of the stubbornness of the
Sakalava chief with whom it had to deal, was driven to an
engagement in which the chief was killed. After this his
followers ran away, the town was burned down, and the
expedition returned home. In thetwo camps, both going and
returning, Christian worship was conducted morning and
evening, sometimes unitedly, and at other times by each party.
in its own tent, but all at the same hour. On Sundays, public
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 17

service was conducted regularly by the native pastors to
which the Sakalava who had courage enough to enter the
camp were admitted. The greatest harmony prevailed
in the two camps from first to last, and some of the soldiers,
who had previously lived ungodly lives, were induced
to become Christians by what they saw and heard during
_ their camp life. We believe, too, that the manner in which
the business of these military expeditions was conducted has
had a most healthy influence on the Sakalava tribes with
which they came in contact, and we trust will have done
much to prepare them for the acceptance of the Gospel of
Christ.

2.—GENERAL ADMINISTRATION.— During the last two or
three years, the Government, in addition to strengthening and
increasing the army, have been anxious to improve the
administration of the Jaws and the general government of the
country. With this intention several important measures
have been taken into consideration, which, when fully
matured and efficiently executed, will doubtless prove a
great boon to the nation. Some of these, however, are still
only partially developed, and others are rendered almost
useless by the incompetency of those on whom the executive
power rests.

The first thing of this nature attempted by the Government
was to reform and improve the administration of public
justice. There was certainly great need for reformation in
this department. The old system was rotten to the core.
Bribery was universal. The administration of the laws was
in the hands of a class of men called Andriambaventy (chief
nobles), and what was known under the name of justice was
simply the decision of these chief nobles, which was, almost
unexceptionally, awarded to the highest bidder. Under this
system anything like justice was impossible, and it gave the
rich unlimited power of oppressing the poor. Many other
evils also resulted from this system. Cases which might
have been settled in a few days were kept in suspense for
years with the hope of increased gain to the judges. Money
was borrowed at most exorbitant rates by parties having
suits in court, in order that they might be able to bribe the
18 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

judges and their friends, and this, not infrequently, ended in
the complete ruin of those parties with their families, and
sometimes also in their being reduced to slavery. These
evils being known to the Queen and Prime Minister, they
determined, as soon as the way became clear for action, to
effect some radical change whereby such disorders might be
checked, if not entirely prevented. On the 21st of February,
1878, the Prime Minister called together the judges and the
chief officers in the courtyard of the Palace, and made known
to them the will of the Queen with regard to the future
administration of justice. The new arrangements were that
instead of one court, as formerly, at which all cases, of
whatever nature, had been investigated, there were, in future,
to be three, each having charge of a distinct class of cases
brought up for trial, and having alsu its own place of
assembly.* Each of these departments was to consist of
thirteen individuals (an idea probably taken from the English
custom of having ¢welve jurymen, the Malagasy adding one
more as president of the court), two of whom were to be
appointed from the Axdriambaventy (the former judges), and
eleven from the Manaméboninahitra (officers, lit. having
honours), who had hitherto taken no part in such business.
Another important part of the new arrangements was that
the functions of each of these separate courts were to be
confined to the examining of witnesses, and the collecting of
evidence. The evidence when collected was to be submitted
to the Prime Minister and a few of the chief officers for
their opinion, which opinion was afterwards to be submitted
to the Queen for final decision. The principal objects aimed
at by these arrangements were the more quick despatch of
judicial business, and the prevention of bribery, thereby
securing greater justice in the administration of the laws. |
We believe there has been decided improvement in these
respects.’ Cases of bribery are certainly less frequent, and

* The first of these courts was to take charge of all civil suits, and to meet
north of the Palace ; the second was to have charge of all cases of forcible
and unjust seizure of property, and to meet west of the Palace; the third
was to have charge of all criminal offences, such as theft, murder, etc.,
and to meet south of the Palace. A fourth department was afterwards
added to take cognisance of all important cases and appeals from a
distance, viz., from Betsileo, and other places.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. / 1g

the people have more confidence than formerly that they will
obtain an unprejudiced hearing. in regard to any cause of
complaint; there can be no doubt, however, that some of those
in authority still find means of extracting money from their too
credulous clients. Asarule, cases of litigation are treated with —
greater despatch, though there is still need for improvement in
this respect. Instances still occur in which litigants are kept
waiting a considerable time before they can get their difficulties
settled. We do not know, however, that this is always
unavoidable. Even in England, after long experience and
repeated reforms, it sometimes takes many months, even
_ years, before lawsuits can be finally arranged.

After making arrangements for the more just and expedi-
tious transaction of public business in Antananarivo, the
Queen and Prime Minister turned their attention to the country,
with the view of providing some means by which better
government, and more effectual representation, could be secured
to the country people. The result of their deliberations
was the publishing, on the 4th of July, 1878, of the great
kabary appointing the order of Sakazzam-bohitra (Friends of the
villages), tosuperintend all political and social matters affecting
the order and welfare of the numerous towns and villages in
the province of Imerina. This order of Sakazzam-bohitra is one
of the most important institutions that have appeared, not
only within the last decade, but in the history of Madagascar.
It indicates great wisdom on the part of the rulers of the
country, and also a sincere desire for the welfare of the people
generally. Weare confident that if faithfully carried out it will
do much to raise the social status of Imerina, and also of other
provinces as well. The following paragraph from the Refort
of the Madagascar Mission for 1878 shews the nature of this
institution, and the good it is calculated to produce in a state
of society like that of the Malagasy :—

Another event which we mention as indicating considerable social and
political, as well as religious progress, is the appointment of what are
called the Sakazzam-bohztra (literally : Friends of the villages), together
with the publication of a book containing definite instructions for the
. guidance of these officers in the discharge of their duties. These ‘‘Friends
of the villages’’ are soldiers who are too old for regular service in the army,
and who have been put in charge of their respective villages throughout
20 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

Imerina, as guatdians of the civil rights of the people, and as the only,
but easy, means of communication between the common people and the
Government. They thus occupy a very important and responsible position,
and are entrusted with all matters relating to the political and social
order of their respective villages and districts. There are over 6500 of
these officers in Imerina, with 198 head-stations. There is no government
officer in England whose position answers in every respect to that held by
these Sakaizam-bohitra. They seem to combine, in a modified sense,
the duties of all civic officers from those of mayor. down to those of
common constable. They have no power, however, to settle any matter
of importance, but have to report everything to the Prime Minister for final
settlement. The book of regulations with which they have been supplied,
and which has been circulated far and wide in the country, contains
instructions with regard to divorce, polygamy, the registration of births,
deaths, and marriages, the annual returns of the residents in each village,
all acts of oppression and causes of social disturbance, the sale or renting
of land or houses, the registration of property, stealing, loans, false weights
and measures, the cleaning of the roads and public thoroughfares of the
villages, the non-separation of young slave children from their parents,
‘and also general instructions with respect to the observance of the Lord’s
Day, the attendance of children at school, and the proper regard to be
paid to places of worship. For the work involved in the discharge of
many of these duties the Sakazzam-bohitra receive small fees, e.g., for
the registration of a birth the fee is ¢wofence, for the registration ofa
marriage it is s¢xfence, for other work the fees vary from szxpence to two
shillings. The publication of these regulations we regard with devout
thankfulness as a sign of true progress, and, if fully carried out, they will
have a most beneficial influence on the well-being of the country. As
most of these officers are men of no education, and, with few exceptions,
are unable to read or write, the Government has appointed two or more
writers or clerks to each company. These writers have been selected
from the best scholars in our schools, and as the position is regarded as one
of honour, and has been eagerly sought after, the measure has acted as a
new stimulus to the work of education in the country.

After the lapse of two years we have no reason to abate
our praise of the wisdom displayed in this institution, or to
lower our estimate of the good it is calculated to produce.
We are sorry, however, to have to confess that whilst some
benefits have resulted from it, especially in the more complete
registration of births, deaths, and other important events,
and, to some extent, also in the diminution of crime and
social disorder, yet the institution has not secured to the
country all the good which was intended, and in some
instances it has been a complete failure. Sometimes spas-
modic efforts have. been made to clean and improve the
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 21

roads, and occasionally also to better the attendance at the
schools, but very little good seems to have resulted from
these efforts. One missionary, in charge of a country district,
writes as follows with regard to the proceedings of these
officers :— ;

As to their other duties I cannot judge how they have succeeded,
except that those I have come across have from time to time made frantic
efforts to improve the roads, which spasmodic efforts have as a rule failed
of their object ; but as regards schools my experience of them is that they
have done more harm than good. Before ,their appointment our schools
were better attended than they have been since. The seat of the mischief
seems to be that those who formerly took an interest in the schools, and
felt a sort of responsibility for the school work generally, now simply stand
aside to let the soldiers do their work, which might be all right if the
soldiers did take their places, but is all wrong when they do not, which
latter, I am sorry to say, is more often the case.

Any failure to produce the desired results, however, has
arisen, not from any defect in the institution itself, but from
the utter incompetency of the officers to whom the executive
power has been committed. As already stated, these “Friends
of the villages” are old and worn-out soldiers, who are no
longer capable of military service, and who have been put into
this honourable position as a reward for their long service
in the army. It is now seen that, with few exceptions, they
are the most unfitted, intellectually and morally, of any class
of people in the island to be intrusted with such responsible
duties. They have no sympathy with the social reforms —
which they are asked to aid in carrying out, and with regard
to which they hold a most distinguished position. They belong
to the generation which is now fast passing away, and believe
in their hearts that the old days were decidedly better than
the new. Though some of them have been baptised, and are
members of Christian churches, yet as a body they still cling
to their heathenish superstitions, and are ever among the
first in any revival of the customs of the past. Though
appointed to promote the education and enlightenment of the
country, they are amongst the most ignorant and benighted
subjects in the kingdom. It is a part of their duty to
prevent bigamy and divorce and other immoralities, yet some
of them are leading immoral lives, and cause much trouble to
the weak churches in the country. So long as these men are
22 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

at the head of affairs, and are looked to as the representatives
of the Government in the country villages, there is little
good to be expected from the salutary regulations they are
appointed to enforce, We would not, however, give up all
hope. . There are a few among them who try to do their duty,
and the younger and more intelligent of them will probably
improve by further experience; and considering that the
senior scholars in the schools who have been appointed to
act as their clerks must have an increasing influence, and
may ultimately be at the head of the institution, we may
reasonably hope that the Swkazzam-bohitra will yet prove
themselves to be the true /rzends of the villages, and be a
power for good throughout the country.

These reforms in regard to the administration of justice,
and the government of the country towns and villages, greatly
increased the work of the Prime Minister, and rendered other
changes necessary in order to relieve him of some of his
onerous duties. In addition to his being Prime Minister
and Commander-in-Chief of the army, he had, by the new
arrangements above referred to, made himself chiefly respon-
sible for the impartial administration of the laws, and the
adjustment of all difficulties reported to him. by the Sakazzam-
bohttra. This was seen by all his friends to involve more
labour than his strength was equal to, and he himself was
conscious of the same. He, therefore, began to devise some
plan by which the work, and, to some extent, the responsi-
bility also, might be shared by others. In addition to obtain-
ing personal relief, he was anxious to establish a more
permanent and constitutional form of government. After
devising a scheme which seemed adapted to the specialities
of the Malagasy people, the difficulty appeared to be to
find men of suitable character and ability to occupy the
various offices. Under these circumstances, the attention
of the Prime Minister was directed to the ten evangelists
(usually called the Folo dahy), who had been sent out by the
Palace Church in 1874, and stationed in the principal towns
of Imerina. These were all men of good social position and
superior intelligence. They were among the most successful
of the first lot of students trained in the L: M. S. College,
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 23

and on finishing their course of study were sent out as
evangelists, each having, in addition to his station church
and school, fourteen or fifteen churches and schools under his
care. These men occupied a unique and difficult position,
being supported by the Palace Church and frequently spoken
of as the Queen’s evangelists, but they did their work well,
and proved themselves to be worthy of confidence and respect.
The Prime Minister had often regarded the work of these
evangelists with pleasure, and had repeatedly spoken of them
with some degree of pride; and when the recent government
reforms were under contemplation, he decided on having
these men withdrawn from their evangelistic work in the
country to occupy the new positions in the Government. This
was accordingly done, and other students from the College
were sent to take their places. Respecting the withdrawal
of these ten men and the positions they have been called to
fill, we quote the following extract from the Refort of the
Madagascar Mtsston for 1879 :—

Much has been said and written with regard to these ten men, and their
position has been pointed to, once and again, as proving the existence of
a state church in Madagascar. We have before had occasion to refute
the arguments based on such an unsound foundation, and do not think it
necessary to do so again. We feel it our duty, however, to place on
record our high appreciation of the good work these men have been able
to accomplish in their various districts during the five years of their
evangelistic labours. The fruits of their teaching are abundantly manifest,
and will be so for many years to come. They have occupied a unique and
somewhat difficult position, but, with perhaps one exception, they have
shewn themselves to be men of sound judgment, as well as of superior
intelligence, and have done their work conscientiously and well; and now
that they.have -been called to take up other duties, and to occupy

‘responsible positions in the Government of the country, we trust they
may be equally successful in their new work, and have a long
career of usefulness before them. The services of these men have been
required by the Government in consequence of the various changes and
reforms which are now being made in the mode of administration in
almost every branch of the public service. Hitherto the work of the
Government, in nearly every department, has devolved upon the Prime
Minister, but there is now being made the first attempt in Madagascar to
form what may be called a ménzstry, based partly on European principles,
but greatly modified to meet the circumstances of the country, and the
peculiarities of the Malagasy character. Officers approaching, in some
degree, to what in Europe would be termed Ministers of Education,
Justice, Jurisprudence, etc., are now being appointed, and the ten evan-
24 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

gelists have been recalled to occupy these important and responsible
positions. We regard this movement on the part of the Government as a
step in the right direction, and hope for much good to the country as the
. result of these new arrangements.

The whole scheme of government reforms has not yet been
published, and some of the departments of service, which
appear to have been definitely decided on, are not yet in
working order. The Government moves slowly in these
matters, and is easily hindered in its course by any new
business or fresh difficulty that may arise. We are hoping,
however, that before the close of the present year we may see
a further development of the proposed: scheme of reforms,
especially in the educational department, which has hitherto
been kept in the background.

In addition to changes and reforms in the general conduct
of public business in Antananarivo and throughout the pro-
vince of Imerina, the Government has decided on extensive
changes in its representatives at the numerous military
stations in various parts of the island. This is a most desira-
ble and important decision. Many of the present governors,
with their assistants, have been at their posts for very many
years, know very little of the principles and regime of the
present Government, and in some cases bring only dishonour
to the Queen they represent. Some changes have already
been made, whilst others are expected to take place before
long. In November, 1879, a new governor. and suite were
sent to Fianarantsoa, the capital of the Betsileo province.
The governor is a man of well-tried character, for many years
a deacon of the church at Analakely, and respected by all who
know him. Most of the officers who accompanied him are
also members of the city churches, and are believed to be of
trustworthy character. About the same time also, a new
governor was sent to Mahabo in the south-west, near to the
place where one of the military expeditions was sent in 1873.
This man has been a deacon ofthe church at Ampamarinana
since its commencement, and has ever shewn himself to be a
consistent and earnest Christian. Suitable changes have
since been made in the local government at Tamatave. If
similar appointments to these be made to all the military
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 25

stations where changes are still in contemplation, great
good will result to the country both politically, socially, and
religiously.

3.—SLAVERY.—Slavery has existed in Madagascar from
the time of our earliest acquaintance with the island, though
formerly it was a much greater curse than it has been at any
time during the last decade. Both export and import trade
in slaves was once carried on to a great extent. We read
that when Mr. Jones, the first English missionary who visited
Antananarivo, was on his way from the coast to the Capital,
he met large gangs of slaves, who were being taken to the
coast to be sold and exported to Mauritius, Bourbon, and
other places. Itis also said that when Messrs. Bevan and Jones
arrived in Mauritius in 1818, on their way to Madagascar,
“His Excellency Governor Hall received them very court- |
eously, but discouraged their proceeding to Madagascar at
present; chiefly on account of the slave trade, in which
almost all the Europeans there engage, notwithstanding
the treaty entered into with the King of Ova: so little
is that treaty regarded, that since the date of it 1700
slaves have been imported into the Mauritius.”* In 1820,
His Excellency Governor Farquhar succeeded in concluding
another treaty with Radama I. for the total extinction of
the slave trade. This treaty appears to have been faithfully
kept by that King, but in the reign of his successor all
treaties were set aside, and slaves were extensively imported
from the African continent.t This continued till 1865, when
the late Queen Rasoherina renewed a treaty with the English
Government, and engaged to put a stop to the foreign trade
in slaves. In concluding this treaty the Queen evidently
engaged to do more than she had it in her power to accom-
plish. ‘ihe import trade in slaves continued at as great a
rate as ever. This trade was carried on chiefly by the Arab
and Hindu merchants who live on the coast. Arab dhows
ran backwards and forwards between the west coast of the
island and Mozambique. These dhows were run into the

* Missionary Chronicle, 1818. The first English Treaty with Madagas-
car was concluded October 23, 1817.

+ Export trade in slaves does not appear to have been revived,
26 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

quiet bays along the coast, and away from the Hova towns.
There is no doubt, however, that many of the natives, and
some who occupied influential positions in Imerina, were
guilty of conniving at and encouraging this cruel and illegal
trade. On the 2nd of October, 1874, the Queen issued a
proclamation freeing all Mozambique slaves who had been
imported into Madagascar since the signing of the English
treaty on the 27th of June, 1865. This proclamation, though,
as we believe, made in good faith on the part of the Malagasy
Government, proved a dead letter. The Mozambiques who
had been imported within the time specified were still held
in slavery, and the illicit importation of slaves still continued.
This being the case, the Government determined on more
thorough measures by which the traffic should be stopped,
and the stipulations of the treaty with England faithfully
carried out. After careful and deliberate consideration it
was decided to liberate a// the Mozambiques in the island,
and thus put an end to all treaty difficulties with regard to
them. The 2oth of June, 1877, was the day appointed for the
great kabary, at which the Royal Proclamation was to be
given. The proclamation was printed, and copies were sent
by special messengers to all the military stations in the
island, to be publicly read on the day appointed. Both
before, and on the day of the kabary, every precaution was
taken to impress upon the peopie the importance of the event,
and the serious earnestness of the Government with regard
to the business in hand. An immense concourse of people,
from various parts of the country, assembled at Andohalo
early on the morning of the ever memorable 2oth of June.
The Queen’s Proclamation, read by the Prime Minister, was
in every respect equal to the occasion, and was delivered
with great effect. It was divided into five sections. The
following are some of the concluding clauses of Section v. :—

Now, the kingdom having been given by God to me, I declare that I
will put a stop to these evils, for 1 am a Sovereign fsy mba tia vezovezo
(who hates disturbance or quarrelsomeness).

Therefore I decree that I set free all the Mozambiques in my kingdom to
be my Améaniandro (subjects), whether those newly introduced or those
who have been here for a long time.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 27

And should there be any one who disobeys this edict, and still holds the
Mozambiques as slaves, I shall count such as criminals, and the penalty.
of the laws shall be enforced upon them.

And I also decree that whoever has traded in Mozambiques can no
longer make a legal claim in respect of such transactions. And should
such take place, he that makes such a claim shall be held guilty.

And if this decree of mine be perverted by any one to deceive the wise or
incite the simple, and so cause disturbance in my kingdom, then, whoever
he may be, I will hold him guilty, and condemn him to death, for I am a
Sovereign that will not deceive.* - :

It is now over three years since this proclamation was
made, and we are able to say that it was not only meant in
all seriousness and good faith, but has been most effectual in
putting a stop to all foreign slavery in Madagascar. There
are now no Mozambique slaves in the island.

But though foreign slavery has been abolished in Madagas-
car, domestic slavery still exists. There are thousands of
slaves in the island. It is considered a mark of respectability
to own a slave. There is scarcely a Hova who does not
possess one or more slaves, and some possess a large number.
Under present circumstances, a Malagasy who does not own
a slave is very badly off, and suffers extreme inconvenience.
In all the churches and congregations there are slaves, and
some of them are composed chiefly of slaves. Nearly all
the pastors, deacons, and preachers, as well as members of
the churches, are slave owners; and slaves are to be bought
and sold in the large weekly market near Antananarivo.
These are facts, and we do not wish to hide or excuse them.
‘We must also acknowledge that no legislative action has, as
yet, been taken by the native Government towards the
abolition of domestic slavery, though regulations have been
made with the view of lessening the hardships and increasing
the comforts of the slave. In the book of instructions given
to the Sakazzam-bohitra, in addition to other wholesome laws
regulating the sale of slaves, it is enacted, under severe
penalty, that a young child shall not be separated from its
parents.

* This has been copied from the Mzsstonary Chronicle for October, 1877.
fhe same also contains a vivid description of the circumstances attending
the event.
28 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

While we thus acknowledge the existence of slavery in
Madagascar, we wish it to be understood that it is not slavery
in a cruel form, such as once existed in the West Indies and
in the United States. In the actual working of the system
there is very little to remind us of its evils. Slaves are
usually as free of the master’s house as the children, and are
often treated with the same consideration. Cases of cruelty
to a slave are very rarely heard of. Slaves, moreover, are
often very independent of their masters, and have much of
their own way. Ifa slave gets tired of his master, or thinks
himself badly treated, he has generally no difficulty in finding
anew master more to his own tastes; and this acts asa check
upon the slave owners, who are ashamed to have it “known
that their slaves are anxious to leave them. We do not
mention these things, however, to justify the existence of
slavery, but simply that its true character may be understood.
The principle is wrong, and out of harmony with the teachings
of the New Testament. We feel it to be a blot on the
Christianity of the Malagasy, and shall be glad to see it
removed. In addition to this, though under present
circumstances it may be a convenience, yet it must be a
hindrance to the true and permanent prosperity of the
nation. The position of the missionaries in regard to
this subject is, we believe, perfectly understood by the most
intelligent native Christians, especially by the pastors and
teachers; and frequent opportunities occur of quietly en-
forcing the teachings of the Gospel, and enlightening the
native conscience in respect to this matter. Public opinion
on the subject is growing, and has made considerable advance
during the last ten years. There is an uneasy feeling among
the people with respect to it, and a constant fear of its being
publicly spoken about, which, if it indicates a quickened con-
science on the subject, as we think it does, may be regarded as
a good sign. The price of slaves is also very much lower than it
wasafewyearsago. Though varying very much, yet we believe
that the price of au ordinary slave is at least one-third less
than it was five or six years ago. The fact that slavery is
beginning to be regarded as an institution which must pass
away, the liberation of the Mozambiques, and the recent tax
on slaves, have all had their influence in lowering the price.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 29

The foregoing has reference chiefly to slavery as it exists in
Imerina, but the following account of slavery in Betsileo will
shew that it is much the same in that province :—

Amongst the people of Betsileo, slavery must be seen to be properly
understood. It is attended by few, if any, of those evils that the word is
apt to suggest to English minds. The whole state of society is founded on
the old patriarchal models, in which slaves and children are treated much
alike. The children of slaves, born in the house, get as much attention
and kindness shewn them by the head of the household as do any of his
children or grandchildren in it. Slaves are left very much to do as they
please, and in most cases they appear to be kept principally for the purpose
of adding to the honours of the house to which they belong. There are
many slaves in Betsileo who are to all appearance free men, not having
visited their masters for years past, but simply sending a small piece of
money at the /azdroana (annual festival) to buy a handful of firewood for
their masters, as a mark of their fealty. It would be next to impossible
to keep a man a slave if he were determined to be free, there are so many
opportunities for escape and protection amongst the neighbouring tribes.
With this fact ever before the eyes of both master and slave, the former
has to deal very gently with his servant, and the slave is often very
independent, and shews himself as much master as servant. Such is the
present condition of domestic slavery in Betsileo. In some cases, when a
master wants to get rid of a slave, or a slave to get rid of a certain master,
the slave at once goes to find some one ready to have him. Few, if any,
slaves are exposed for sale by their masters in the market-place. Betsileo
owners are afraid to do so, as they say the eye of God will be upon them,
and evil will be sure to follow. There is, however, a dark side to this
picture, which is brightening year by year as the trade decreases. There
used formerly to be a large traffic in slaves, who were obtained amongst
the neighbouring tribes. These slaves were generally obtained from the
Tanala, or from some of the tribes to the south-east. They were mostly
young people, lads or girls, who had been bought or stolen by Hova
traders, and were taken through Betsileo towards the north. Seven or
eight years ago the trade was common, but now it has almost died away.
The heavy penalty which the Government has put upon the crime of
stealing, or selling free subjects, has no doubt had much to do in putting
a stop to the traffic to the north. Yet even at the present time many
slaves are sent into the Ibara province from the southern Tanala, and
even from Betsileo. These slaves are bought by some of the Ibara kings,
and are then sent west or south to the coast. Here is the case of a
young Betsileo lad, from a village only five miles from Fianarantsoa.
About two years ago, a boy of about fifteen years of age was enticed by a
supposed friend of his father’s to visit one of the markets south, near
Ambohimandroso. While there, this friend sold him to some Ibara
men, and he was carried off by force to the south. The father and mother,
on missing the lad, at once set out in search of him, and traced him
from place to place, until they got near to St. Augustine’s Bay, where he
30 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

was found. The parents had to give the value of three oxen before they
were allowed to take their child back with them. On the way back the
mother died of fever, and the father and son arrived in Fianarantsoa worn
almost to skeletons by fever and hardship. It seems:strange, but the
deceitful friend of the family escaped punishment. Another case: about
six months ago, eleven young people were brought in from the Tanala,
only one day’s journey east.. These had been entrapped by one of their
own under-chiefs, by whom they were brought here and sold. There
can be no doubt that those who bought them knew they had been stolen,
and that several of the officers also knew it. This case is now under
the consideration of the judges. It is not uncommon for slaves to be
owners of slaves, and it sometimes happens that those who have been
freed by the missionaries purchase slaves with the first of their savings.
During the past ten years much has been done to prevent the enslavement
of free people ; and any one guilty in this matter would be put in chains
for ten or twenty years, and any governor, or man in authority, known to
be guilty would be deposed and disgraced.

Confirmatory of the above, it may be méntioned that an
Ibara youth, who could not speak the language of Imerina, was
a short time ago exposed for sale in the Zoma market near
Antananarivo. The boy was purchased and freed by one of
the resident missionaries, who still retains him in his family,
and is giving him an education along with several other boys.
Another way in which the slave system occasionally operates
most painfully, but which might be easily remedied, is in the
difficulties which are sometimes put in the way of a slave who
is anxious to redeem himself. An instance has recently come
to our knowledge in which a slave woman was anxious to pur-
chase her freedom, and was charged by her master more than
double her market value, he, at the same time, informing her
that unless the last twopence be paid within two months the
whole of the money (sixty dollars) she had already paid him
on account would be forfeited, and she taken back again to
slavery. A short time ago, a young man, a slave, who had
received a suitable education, was anxious to be employed as
an evangelist in a distant part of the island. Before going,
he wished to secure his freedom, and also that of his wife and
children, and some of his friends had promised to lend him a
reasonable sum of money for the purpose. The amount
required by his masters, however, was so exorbitant that he
was obliged to give up the idea of freedom, and to remain a
slave. In this instance the missionaries were suspected of

- TEN YEARS’ REVIEW, . 31

having a hand in the business, and there were several owners
of the slave, which greatly increased the difficulty. Other
instances of a similar kind might be given, but these will
suffice.

With regard to the general question of abolition, we could
not, at present, recommend, or desire, any abrupt or sweeping
action on the part of the Government. The country is not
yet ripe for this. Many reforms of a political and’ social
character need to be effected first. Any sudden and general
action at the present time would probably do much more
harm than good, and might lead to a general revolution. The
rulers of the country are too wise to attempt any such
measure, and, in our opinion, it will be far better for them to
go about the work quietly and to refrain from any sweeping
and final action, until the country is better prepared for it.
There are some things, however, which we should like to see
taken in hand at once, and which might be done without
raising any disturbance. (1) We could wish that the right of
a slave to redeem himself should be formally and publicly
recognised ; (2) it is desirable that the price at which a
slave, either by the proceeds of his own labours or by the help
of his friends, might purchase his own freedom, should be
definitely fixed by the Government, and should not be left to
the caprice and avarice of his master; and (3) we think that
immediate steps should be taken to put a stop to the sale of
slaves in the public market—a custom which is a disgrace
both to the Government and the churches. Any thing beyond
this, at the present time, might be premature, but these |
two principles being adopted, and the sale of slaves in the
public market stopped, would free the system of some of its
occasional harshness, and would quietly prepare the people
for further action, and finally for a general abolition, which
must come sooner or later.

4.— INTOXICATING DRINKS.—There can be no doubt that
the manufacture and sale of intoxicating drinks in Madagas-
car have increased during the last ten years, not only on the
coast, but also in the central provinces of the island; and

this, too, in spite of the prohibitory laws of the native
Government, and the repeated attempts to put them in force.
32 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION,

The causes of this increase are probably (a) the greater number
of Creole traders from Mauritius and Bourbon who have settled
in Madagascar, some on the coast and some in the Capital,
and whose principal article of merchandise seems to be strong
drink of one kind or another; (4) the inordinate liking for
such drinks on the part of some of the natives, especially the
young men of Antananarivo, who are connected with some of
the most influential families ; and (c) the greed of gain on the
part of many of the’Hova residents in Betsileo and other
provinces, who are the principal spirit vendors in those places,
and appear to make considerable profit out of the traffic.
These parties have succeeded by cunning, bribery, and other
means, in evading the prohibitory laws, and in thwarting all
attempts made by both the central and local governments to
check their proceedings. The sources from which these
drinks are derived are both native and foreign. That chiefly
used on the coast is Mauritius rum, imported by the Creole
traders; this is also brought into Imerina and other inland
provinces by the same parties. In addition to this, there
is a native spirit distilled from the sugar-cane, which is very
extensively sold in the central parts ofthe country. InIboina
and some other places on the north-west of the island, a
native -spirit is obtained from the seed of the satrana, a
species of fan-palm. In Betsileo, much has been done to
stop the drinking habits of the people. Time after time
public proclamations have been made, but these seem to
have had little effect, so much so, that at the present
time there is more native spirit sold than in any of the
previous five years. Formerly, the sale of it was mostly
confined to the town and country markets; now, it, is
found for sale at nearly every wayside station where ‘rice
or other articles of food are to be bought. Its cheapness
makes this spirit very tempting to the poor Betsileo, as they
can get a quart for about two shillings. At Ambohiman-
droso and many of the markets to the south no spirit is
allowed to be publicly sold. The same rule is, to some extent,
carried out at Ambositra, where the people appear to have
taken the law into their own hands. The importation of
Mauritius rum through Mananjara, though still great, does
not prevail to such an extent as formerly, yet large quantities
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 33

are to be had in the town at about a shilling a quart.
During the past few weeks, the spirit traffic has been brought
before the governor, and it is hoped some effectual steps
will be taken towards lessening the evil. The principal
makers of it are Hova settlers from Imerina, whose residences
all over the country can easily be distinguished by their
surrounding patches of sugar-cane.

In Vonizongo, one of the six divisions of Imerina, the
practice of rum-drinking is said to have been increasing for
some years past. The custom is more secretly followed near
the mission station, but at Andriba and Ampotaka, three
days’ journey from Fiarenana, the manufacture of rum is
extensively carried on, judging from the quantity consumed
at the two chief markets of Andriba and Valalafotsy. A
petition from the West Vonizongo churches, praying for the
prohibition of the traffic, has been presented to the Govern-
ment.

Among the Sakalava on the west coast, drinking also
prevails to a large extent. In some of the villages the still
is in use in almost every household, the families helping
themselves from the open pan into which the spirit runs from
the still; and even the little children, picking up a potsherd,
dip and drink at their pleasure. “It is a pitiable sight,” says
one of the missionaries in his report of a visit to the west
coast, “to see the blear-eyed parents idling about in these
villages, or to hear them shouting in their drunken merriment ;
but still more so, to see the little naked children staggering in
their play.”” Similar experiences are also to be met with in
other parts of the island. Among the Sihanaka, to the north
of Imerina, rum-drinking is the great hindrance to missionary
work, and to all efforts to raise and enlighten the people.
The REV. J. PEARSE, in his report of his work among this
tribe, says:—

The giant evil with which we have to contend, and the greatest prac-
tical hindrance to our work here, is the extensive manufacture of rum,
and the rum-drinking by which the Sihanaka are enslaved. Even in
Christian England it is, alas! too well known that drink is the prolific
parent of almost every other evil; and here it is abundantly manifest
that by it the Sihanaka are chained to ignorance, superstition, and sins.
34 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

Around Ambatondrazaka on every side there are extensive patches of
ground cultivated with sugar-cane, and the same is the case around every |
village in the district. Nearly every stem of that sugar-cane means its
equivalent in rum, for not more than one in a thousand is used for any
other purpose than distilling the vile spirit which is obtained from it:
What I stated in my Report for 1867, is still a fact, viz., that ‘making
rum seems to be ¢e occupation of a considerable portion of the population.’’
In almost every village and hamlet, through the length and breadth of
the district, there are rude native-made stills, constantly worked in the
manufacture ofrum. I sent to count the number in one hamlet close to
Ambatondrazaka, and am informed that the total there is over a hundred /
The expenses connected with the manufacture of the rum are but trifling ;
there is no duty levied on it; and it is sold at the low price of twopence per
quart bottle. It is drunk universally by both men ‘and women; and at
every meeting among the people—whether joy or sorrow be the occasion of
meeting—the poisonous draught is handed round. Children of all ages
join their parents and others in drinking it, and it is even given to infants
before they can walk. This, as it relates to the children and infants, is
a peculiarly painful and startling statement, but it is absolutely true,
In our recent school examinations, I have made most careful enquiries,
and I have myself been alarmed to learn, from their own lips, that there
are not fifty of our scholars who, during the past year, have not taken
rum in larger or smaller quantities, and with greater or less frequency.

This rum-drinking is a most formidable barrier to the progress of our
mission work, and its influence is not only adverse to education and
Christianity, but is debasing in every way, and productive of wide-spread
moral and physical evil among all classes of the community.

5.— REVIVAL OF THE “TANGENA” AND OTHER SUPER-
STITIONS.—At a time of general progress, when education and
Christianity are making decided advance in almost every part
of the country, it is somewhat humiliating to have to report
revivals of heathenish and cruel forms of superstition. Such,
however, have repeatedly taken place in Madagascar during
the last few years. The most noted instance of this was at a
large village called Ambohimalaza, about ten miles east of
_ Antananarivo. This is comparatively a wealthy village, and

contains, in some respects, a superior class of people. The
number of large and respectable-looking houses cannot fail to
arrest the attention of the traveller as he passes through the
village on his way from the coast, and leads him to suppose
that the inhabitants must be in decided advance of those in
some ofthe neighbouring villages. For several years there
. have been two churches there in connection with our Mission,
with day-schools attached, and we were hoping that real
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. , 35

progress was being made. It was, therefore, with intense
surprise that we heard that this place had been the scene
of the revival of one of the most cruel forms of superstition |
that has ever been known in Madagascar, viz., the Zangena,
or “Trial by the ordeal of poison.” This was not a matter
which could be easily overlooked as if it were a harmless
superstition. It was a serious crime which the Government
was obliged to take cognisance of, and punish. The action
taken by the Government in regard to it is thus referred to
in the Report of the Madagascar Mtsston for 1878 :—

In a large and important village, not more than ten miles from Antana-
narivo, the Zazgena, or ‘Trial by the ordeal of poison,’” has been resorted
to by some of the chiefs of the people, as well as by others in the
village, and it is believed that several persons have -died in consequence.
For a long time the matter was kept secret, but at last it came to the
ears of the Government, who lost no time in making a most thorough
investigation of the whole business. The trial. extended over several
weeks, and was brought to a close by a public £adary, when the judgment
of the Queen was made known to a large assembly of people. The Queen’s
word has also been printed and widely circulated in all parts of Imerina
and in other places as well. Two of the principal offenders were con-
demned to death (though one of them died in custody and the other
had previously escaped*); one was put in chains; several were fined one
hundred dollars each, and two fifty dollars each; a fine of 10,000 dollars
was levied upon the town. It is hoped that these prompt and decisive
measures on the part of the Government will prevent any similar
occurrence in any other part of the country. We cannot, however, but
regard this event with deep sorrow, shewing as it does how easily large
numbers of the people, even in the heart of Imerina and in the immediate-
neighbourhood of the Capital, can be drawn back into their old heathen
habits, even those the most cruel and demoralising.

This event, though standing alone in its magnitude and
cruelty, is yet only one of many instances we have witnessed,
during the last few years, of the superficial hold which
Christianity possesses on the senior portion of the popula-
tion. These elders among the people still remember the
customs of their childhood, are extremely ignorant, and
have very little sympathy with the changes and reforms that
are taking place around them. Consequently, when sickness
or trouble of any kind arises in their families, or any other
opportunity occurs, they are most ready to fall back on. their

* This one has since been caught and put to death.
36 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

former superstitions. We have recently had reason to
believe that this is done much more frequently than we had
any knowledge of. One missionary, after reporting the
devastating effects of a severe epidemic among his people,
writes :— ,

This fearful disease threw back the natives upon their old superstitious
rites and customs. It was a time of severe trial, and much of our work
could not stand this crucial test. The people sought after ‘‘wizards that
peep and that mutter,’’ and ceased to seek unto their God. For a season
there was a strong current of idolatry and witchcraft running throughout the
district, and many went back from the faith. Everywhere the churches
were emptied of worshippers and the schools of scholars, while the charm-
maker found his enchantments eagerly sought after and liberally paid for.
The most absurd things were done to effect cures by the orders of these
diviners, and again and again during this sad time my own eyes beheld
things which showed unmistakably what a powerful reaction had set in.
I am glad to say that this year (1880) the seasons have returned to
their wonted course, the rains being more abundant and continuing
longer than was the case during the two unhealthy seasons, and in
consequence the fever epidemic is comparatively unknown.

Another of the Imerina missionaries writes as follows :—

The most serious effect of the epidemic was to drive multitudes of the
people back to their old heathen practices, with the hope of charming
away the disease. I was once led by a native pastor to the summit of
a lofty hill, and there, amidst a grove of trees, was pointed out to me a
rude kind of altar, where the blood of animals and fowls was spilt, and
offerings of honey and bits of silver were constantly made, to assuage the
anger of the spirits which were supposed to have brought the fever. I
was told that it was almost a daily resort of the people, and that on
the Sabbath some of the Christians would gather round the table of the
Lord in remembrance of the blood that ‘‘was shed for many, for the
remission of sins,’? and on the afternoon of the same day would assemble
in the “sacred grove,’’ to present a sacrifice of blood to the spirits of
their deceased ancestors. This shows the danger that may occur sof
a reaction amongst a people, the majority of whom have but a loose hold
upon Christianity, and who have been led to renounce their heathenism
more from political than from any other motives. Withdraw the missionaries, _
and soon, at least in country places, there would be a rush back to
ancestral customs. I have often been surprised at the slow progress made
in the erection of a new chapel, and the frequent entire suspension of
building operations. The want of money is no doubt often the reason of
this; but I am also told that the old faith, which forbad all kinds of
building during certain times which were regarded as presaging evil to
the builder, still has its influence. ‘Lucky days’’ also are sometimes
chosen for the opening of new places of worship.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 37

The experience of our brethren in Betsileo is also in
keeping with what has been stated above, one of them
writing on this subject says :—

The two customs of the old heathen superstition known as szkzdy and
salamanga were commonly in practice all over Betsileo eight or nine years
ago; but from the time of the Queen’s visit in 1873 active measures have
been taken to suppress them. These measures were successful in keeping
them in the background, so that few were bold enough to practice them in
public. Within the past year or so they have, to some extent, been
revived. The reasons for their revival have been the rumours circulated at
various times that the Queen and court were going to leave off praying
and return to the customs of their ancestors, and that the people
were to do the same. It is also said that the Jesuit priests have advised
their revival, thinking that by so doing they might gain converts. The
principal reason, however, is that a great proportion of the people are yet
heathen, and would be glad if the old superstitions were again in fashion.

In other districts also superstitious practices prevail to a
very large extent, especially among the Sihanaka and in
TIboina, but in these places they are not relapses, as but
few of the people have as yet made any profession of
renouncing their idolatry, and embracing Christianity. When
they do so, we trust it will be done earnestly and intel-
ligently, so as to prevent any repetition of some of the
experiences of the central provinces. Mr Pearse, writing
of the superstitions of the Sihanaka, says :—

Every vestige of public idolatry has been swept away from the Antsi-
hanaka district. The chief influence which brought about that result
was the conduct of the Queen of Madagascar, in ordering the royal
idols to be destroyed, in 1869. This was referred to by the Prime Minister
in the speech he made at the opening of the Chapel Royal, in April last,
and was spoken of by him as a ‘‘wonderful thing” to have taken place in
Madagascar; and in it we all gratefully acknowledge the power of God
and the operations of the Holy Spirit. The population of Antsihanaka
may now be described as non-idolaters and non-christian. It is a blessed
thing that we can affirm the former. The great mass of the people,
however, including those who attend our services, are still undoubtedly
heathen at heart, and also in many of their beliefs and practices; and the
tenacity with which they cling to their superstitions, after having given up
their idols, reminds me of the Welsh chieftain, who having embraced the
Gospel in a way, abandoned the profession of heathenism, but still retained
the practice of cannibalism ; and, that there might be no need for work on
the Sunday, had his human victims killed and also cooked on Saturday!

In my Report for 1877—1878, I gave a short account of how large num-
bers of the people at that time wore a single grain of Indian corn around
38 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

their neck, as a talisman against a disease which, it was affirmed, a
tenrec had announced would appear. During this year, a similar story
agitated the people. In the month of February, a report was circulated
that a dog had spoken, and announced that a hurricane, causing grievous
famine, would devastate the district; that immense hailstones would
descend ; and that even the heavens would fall. To prevent this calamity,
the people were told to get six black and six white beads, and to wear
them round the neck, as that would prevent any harm overtaking the
wearer. The result was that, men, women, and children were seen with
these twelve beads hung by a thread round the neck, believing in their
talismanic power to preserve them from evil.

Only a few weeks ago, among those who came into the dispensary, was .
a man far advanced in life, who wore around his neck a greasy string upon
which were threaded two black and two white beads. I asked him what
was the object of wearing them. On hearing my question, he put his hand
to the string, which had the effect of breaking it. ‘‘Oh,’’ he said, ‘‘it is of
no further use since it is bruken. ‘‘She said so,’’ he continued, ‘‘yes, she
said that if the thread broke it would avail no longer.’ ‘‘Well,’’ I asked,
‘what is the meaning of it??? ‘Oh!’’ he replied, ‘‘a sorceress at our
village told us to wear four beads like that, and we all obeyed her. She
said that it was necessary in order to cause the rains to fall; and when we
did it the rain came last year, whereas, if we had not obeyed her, there
would have been a drought !”’

The fear of witches and the belief in witchcraft by these people, also
remains as firmly rooted in their minds as their superstitious regard for
charms. Within the past month this has received a painful illustration.
I was asked to go and see Andriantsingory, a man who has been connected
with the Ambatondrazaka congregation from before the time of our arrival
here. Upon reaching the house, I found him suffering from pneumonia,
and, while giving him the medicines which I thought most likely to be
beneficial to him, I urged upon his family the necessity of taking the
greatest care lest he should be exposed to cold. I continued to attend
him for four days, but at the expiration of that period his relatives took
him away, on one cold day, to a hut in the rice-fields, the real reason for
which was that they believed there were so many witches in the town ©
that if he remained there his illness would be sure to end fatally. The
poor fellow would not submit to this removal by his friends, and during the
night he walked back to town from the place to which he had been taken.
He sent to me early the following (Saturday) morning, asking me to visit
him again and to continue to give him medicine. I was very happy to do
so, and, although his disease was aggravated by exposure and fatigue, yet
‘I indulged some hope of his recovery. But, urged by their continued fears
of the witches in the town, his friends removed him again on the Thursday,
and he died the next morning in some miserable hut to which he had been
taken.

The above, and various other superstitions, are spread over the whole of
Antsihanaka. The evangelist, Rajaonina, who was at Ambovory, finding
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 39

that on this account he could make little impression on the people, has .
retired. He had a hare-lipped cow, and two rabbits, and he was waited
on by a number of the people, who requested him ‘either to remove or kill
them, as such things are tabooed in the place, because, the inhabitants
say, they bring sickness and other calamities, if they are kept.

6.—EPIDEMICS.—Within the period now under review,
severe epidemics have repeatedly made their appearance in
various parts of Madagascar, and have carried off large
numbers of the population.. These have also interfered
considerably with educational and other work, sometimes
putting a stop to all teaching for months together in the
districts affected. That which has been most extensive in
its ravages is the epidemic of smad//-pox. There is scarcely a
province or district in the island which has not suffered more
or less from this dire disease, at one time or another, and some
places have been attacked repeatedly. The coast tribes
have suffered more severely than those in the interior. In
1875, it ravaged most fearfully on the west coast, especially
in the towns of Mojanga, Marovoay, and other places in
their neighbourhoods. It then appeared on the north-east
coast, and made fearful ravages in the port of Tamatave
and many other towns. It afterwards made its way: inland,
and there was scarcely a village on the road between Tama-
tave and Antananarivo that was not affected by it, so that for
a time all communication between the coast and the Capital
_ Was stopped. Many of the towns and villages in Imerina
have been repeatedly visited by it, but the people in the
Betsileo province seem to have suffered much more severely.
Last year it was raging on the south-east coast, in and near
Vangaindrano. One of the missionaries was recently visiting
the evangelists and churches in that neighbourhood, but
was prevented from going to Vangaindrano, all schools and
churches being then closed on account of the small-pox. At
the present time, this disease is raging terribly in many
small villages in the Anativolo district, in the north of
Imerina, and all church and school work is stopped in conse-
quence. The disease is also said to be spreading, and to be
coming nearer the Capital.*

* Since this was written several cases have occurred in Antananarivo.
40 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

In Antananarivo and Fianarantsoa many of the people
have been vaccinated, and at most of the mission stations in
the country vaccine is extensively used. But there are many
natives who still object to this European institution, and
consequently suffer severely whenever the small-pox appears
in their neighbourhood. We trust that before long we shall
see compulsory vaccination adopted by the Government, and
duly enforced throughout the country.

‘An epidemic of malartal fever has also committed great
ravages in some parts of the country, but has been much
more local than that of small-pox. The districts chiefly
affected by this epidemic are those in the west and north-west
of Imerina, and nearly the whole of the Betsileo province.
This epidemic first made its appearance, at any rate in its
most malignant form, in the early part of 1878. Its approxi-
mate cause is thus explained by Dr. G. W. PARKER, one of
Her Majesty Ranavalona’s physicians :—

The proximate cause of the epidemic (i.e. that which set the ball in
motion, as it were,) was undoubtedly the setting in of the usual cold
weather more suddenly and at an earlier period than usual, the change of
season from wet and warm to cold and dry occurring very early in Apr2l
instead of about the beginning of May. Speaking from memory, there
were three days of intensely cold winds from the S.E. about Saturday,
April 6th, almost immediately preceding the outbreak of the disease. In
consequence of the strong wind the evaporation of the water covering the
rice-fields and marshes was hastened, generating a corresponding amount
of malarious gases, and it is to the concentrated state of these gases that
the virulence of the epidemic seems chiefly due.

Besides malaria, “the influence of the ever-growing filth
which is to be found in and around the dwellings of the Ma-
lagasy, more especially in the hamlets and villages,” is
stated by Dr. Parker to be one of the “more permanent and
scarcely less important causes of the disease.” The symptoms
accompanying this epidemic are also thus described by Dr.
Parker :—

According to intelligent natives, there were no warning symptoms (at
least none were noticed), to tell when a man was about to be attacked.
The first noticeable sign was colicy pain, followed by bilious diarrhea
and vomiting, the two last being usually favourable signs. In every case,

after about twelve hours’ illness, there was marked loss of flesh, the
sunken eyes, hollow cheeks, and burning skin, distinguishing those who
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 4I

were truly ill. In bad cases the disease assumed a typhoid character,
death ensuing in from one to seven days; while in a favourable case the
disease became first remittent and then intermittent, the attacks usually
occurring every morning or every evening, shewing at last the malarious
nature of the disease. Natives say that the intermittent fever (Za@z0) of
the central part of Madagascar differs from the same disease as found
on the coast only in the greater mildness of its attacks, and the longer
period of incubation ; the characteristic ‘‘shaking-fits’’ usually occurring
on the second or the third day after exposure to malarious air if near the
coast, but not until after the lapse of two weeks or more if inland.

The remedies found to be most effective are also mentioned
by the same medical authority :—

While the nature of the epidemic was doubtful, the only remedy which
seemed to do any good was camphor dissolved in brandy or spirit, of
which one or two doses usually sufficed to relieve; but when its nature was
better understood, quinine combined with iron and epsom salts superseded
the camphor, especially as the adjunct to the camphor made the former
remedy only too popular.

The missionary districts in Imerina which were most
affected by this epidemic are those of Ambohimanga, Am-
batonakanga, Amparibe, Ampamarinana, Ambohibeloma, and
Vonizongo; and of these Ambatonakanga, Ambohibeloma,
and East Vonizongo appear to have suffered more severely
than the rest. Of the sufferings in the Ambatonakanga
district in 1878, the REv. C. F. Moss writes :—

To one part of my district, comprising some sixteen or eighteen churches,
the year has been one of heavy affliction and severe trial. The fever which
in ordinary years visits the neighbourhood in a more or less mild form,
assumed this year a more virulent and typhoid character, complicated
in many cases with pulmonary affections, dysentery, and diarrhcea. It
is impossible to describe the misery and desolation that prevailed during
April, May, and June, when the disease was at its height. In the south
Andringitra valley, extending east to Ambohimanga, whole families were
sometimes swept off in a single day. In some houses the dead remained
unburied for several days, because no relative had survived to know of
their state. The rice rotted in the fields unreaped. Apathy, listlessness,
and terror paralysed the poor people, and unfitted them for all self-help.
The weak faith of many could not stand the strain put upon it, and they
thought the ‘‘praying’’ that could not preserve them from fever and death
was of no use. So in several villages the schools were stopped and the
churches shut up. The real cause of the visitation alas! was to be found
in the filthiness of their own persons and houses. In one small hut I
counted fifteen persons young and old, all down with fever. And no
42 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

wonder, for the cow, the dung-heap, the dust-heap, and the family
all occupied the same room. Many ounces of quinine, besides other
medicines kindly supplied by the Queen and Prime Minister, were supplied
to the poor people ; but, with so much fever-breeding malaria constantly
around them, it could be only a palliative, and in sixteen or eighteen
small villages more than a thousand people died.

The report of the RFv. J. PEILL contains the following
paragraph on the same subject :—

This disease has carried off its hundreds in the Ambohibeloma district,
and left many others more or less confirmed invalids. At one time the tombs
were so full that no more dead could be buried in them, while the Zaméa
mena (the usual wrapping for the corpse which serves instead of a coffin)
were so scarce that very frequently they had to be torn up inthe market,
and sold piecemeal, the supply being far from sufficient to meet the demand.
Of course the price of this commodity rose to a fabulous amount. During
the autumn months of these two fatal years the chief work of the missionary
and evangelists consisted in distributing medicines and visiting the sick.
To alleviate the misery, the Queen sent out large quantities of medicine,

which proved very opportune and acceptable, as my supply was beginning
to run short.

The REv. T. T. MATTHEWS, in his report of the East Voni-

zongo district for 1878, makes the following reference to the
epidemic :—

In consequence of the epidemic of fever, with which we were visited
about the end of February, and which has continued more or less severe
ever since, not only was my work in the way of dispensing medicine much
increased, but my ordinary labours among the churches and schools were
broken up, and in consequence nearly all teaching was suspended. For
about four months every year, from February to June, the fever is generally
severe in Vonizongo, and especially so during the months of May and
June; but during the past year it has been far worse than I have ever
seen it. I received information regarding the epidemic from about
thirty of my churches. There were about 4000 church members and
adherents in connection with those churches, and of these more than 1000
have died ; 150 of this number were in connection with the mother church
at Fihaonana. It must be borne in mind, however, that most of those
who were attacked by the epidemic received no proper medical treatment.
Of those who were willing to receive advice and medicine, the great
majority recovered, in fact, hardly a fatal case occurred; whilst in the
more distant, and consequently less enlightened villages, hardly a sick
person was to be found who was willing to give up the native charms and

incantations, and accept of the proper remedies—hence the excessive
mortality.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 43

We have also received the following account of the epi-
demics of fever and small-pox in the Betsileo province :—

In 1878 we were visited by a severe epidemic of malarial fever. It made
its first appearance to the north in the valley of the Matsiatra, and grad-
ually swept along the lower lying lands to the west and south. The
district of the Isandra suffered most, as it was very fatal along the banks
of the Matsiatra, and up many of its tributary streams. This violent form
of fever made its appearance in the following year (1879) with renewed
strength. Sweeping along its old course, it carried away hundreds after
only a few days’ illness. Traversing nearly the whole of the Isandra, it
continued southward to the western part of Tsienimparihy. Thousands
died in these two years, and the greatest alarm and anxiety were everywhere
” manifest. It appears from the statements of natives, that there was a
similar epidemic eleven or twelve years ago, but that it was not so fatal
in its character. Following close on the first outbreak of the fever, small-
pox made its appearance, and spread rapidly over the province. The
most active measures were at once taken. The people were commanded
to have their children vaccinated, and in course of a short time hundreds
were done either at the dispensary, or at the government house by the
dispensary assistant. Notwithstanding all precautions, large numbers
died. Many of the Betsileo chiefs compelled their people to be inoculated,
which appears to be an old custom. This no doubt helped greatly to
spread the disease and swell the numbers of the victims. Leaving Betsi-
leo to the eastward, it passed into the Tanala, where it continued to rage
for many months with great fatality, nearly one-third of the young people
dying. Those who had been vaccinated appeared to lead a charmed
life, for although often called upon to nurse the sick, in few instances were
they themselves attacked, and even then it was only slightly.

For three successive years the epidemic of fever has visited
the districts above named with most distressing results.
This last year (1880), however, it has appeared ina much
milder form. The people have also had some experience,
and a great deal of advice, with regard to the treatment of
the sick, and fewer deaths have taken place.

It will be observed that this epidemic has had a great deal
to do with the return of the people to their former supersti-
tions. In some cases it seems to have been the sole cause,
the former habits of the people and their imperfect know-
ledge of the Gospel predisposing them to such relapses.
One of the most distressing, though perhaps salutary,
results of the trial through which so many of the people
have been passing, is the evidence it has afforded of the
very superficial hold which the “praying” has upon the
44 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION,

great mass of the people. It has indeed been painful to see
the houses of prayer left desolate, and the God of all
comfort forsaken, at the time when His help and blessing
were most needed. The faith of that people must indeed be
weak which prefers the superstitions of heathenism to the
consolations of the Gospel. The experiences of the last few
years may, however, be a means of purifying the faith of the
few, and will certainly be a help to the missionary in his care
of the churches.

Great praise is due to Her Majesty the Queen andto His Ex-
cellency the Prime Minister, for the great kindness they have
shewn and the help they have given tothe people in their time of
sickness. They have acted as a true “father and mother,” and
their conduct has greatly increased the affectionate regard in
which they were previously held. Not only have the medical
gentlemen in the employ ofthe Government given their special
attention to the sufferings of the people, but the Queen and
Prime Minister have sent out repeatedly to the affected dis-
tricts making inquiry respecting the sick, and have given away
large quantities of medicine, at the same time encouraging
the people to send for more whenever they might require
it. Surely such beneficent conduct on the part of the
Christian rulers of the kingdom will have some influence in
stimulating the weak faith of many of their subjects, and
in counteracting the superstitious tendencies which have
manifested themselves of late.

7.— VISITS OF THE QUEEN TO BETSILEO AND AMBOHIMAN-
GA.— Royal visits to distant provinces in Madagascar are very
rare, and when paid they usually occupy much time, and cause
great excitement. Such visits, therefore, become historical
events of considerable importance, and are used by the natives
as marks in their measurement of time. These events are also
sometimes attended by lasting results to the places visited.
One of these memorable visits was paid by Her Majesty Queen
Ranavalona to the Betsileo province in 1873. Her Majesty
was attended by the Prime Minister, and by all the court ladies
and chief officers of the Palace, who were also accompanied
by a large number of aides-de-camp, and by a still larger
number of camp followers, As this visit happened to take
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 45

place at the same time as the two war expeditions to the south-
west, Antananarivo was.almost emptied of its usual population,
and but little work of any kind could be carried on. The visit
occupied three months from the day of leaving to the day of
returning to the Capital; of this time, one morith was taken up
in travelling and two were spent at Fianarantsoa. Previous
to this visit, no reigning sovereign had visited Betsileo since
Radama I., who entered the province with an army for the
purpose of extending and consolidating his conquests. The
Betsileo had not been easily subdued, and their Hova
conquerors had formerly treated them with extreme severity.

Times had changed, however, since then, and Ranavalona,
their Christian Queen, was about to pay them a visit of peacé
and friendship. The announcement of the intended visit
catised much excitement both in Imerina and in Betsileo, and
extensive preparations were made in both provinces. Much
good was also hoped for as the result of the visit. One of
the missionaries in Betsileo writing of the event says :—

In the early part of the year 1873 theré was much excitement throughout
Betsileo at the expected visit of the Queen and court. Roads were made,
bridges repaired, and large quantities of rice with other provisions collected
to meet the wants of the great numbers of camp followers and others
travelling southwards, and everything that the people could think of as
pleasing to the Queen was done by them. Amongst other things it was
thought by many, especially by those in authority, that if it was known
that they were members of the church they would be sure to rise into favour.
Hence many began to press eagerly forward to baptism and church
membership. To the country churches, members of very questionable
character appear to have been admitted, unknown to the missionaries.
This influx of chief men, followed as they naturally were by hundreds of the
common people, tended greatly to swell the congregations all over the
province. Asa result of this also, village after village put up temporary
sheds, afterwards to be called chapels or churches. The Queen and court
encamped on a small plain a little to the north-east of the town, now called
Tstanolondroa. Here receptions were held daily, except on the Sunday
when all were expected to attend service either in the town or camp. The
greatest courtesy and respect were shown to the missionaries on every
occasion of their attendance. A deep interest was manifested as to the
state of the schools, and the instruction of the people. The reception given
to the school children was most pleasing, while the liberality of the Queen
in giving all the scholars dresses and other presents, equalled her
kindness and courtesy. During the stay of the Queen, many matters
of public interest were brought forward. Among these was that of the
adminstration of the laws (the classification of different crimes and their
46 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

punishments). In several of the Aabary (public speeches) the subject of
education was pressed upon the people, and they were told that the
children must be sent to school. There can be no doubt that, although
the missionaries had already given considerable attention to elementary
education, the speeches of the Prime Minister gave a new stimulus to
education throughout the whole of Betsileo. The respect shewn by the
Queen and Prime Minister to the missionaries, the strict observance of the
Sabbath, together with the important place given to education in many
of the kadary, left a lasting impression on the crowds of Betsileo and
Tanala, which has in the last seven years not been without effect in the
progress which the schools and churches have made.

In addition to the changes made in the administration of the laws, and
the stimulus given to the churches and schools by the Queen’s visit, several
important changes were made in the local government. The former
governor was removed, and another one was appointed in his place. This
is supposed to have been done in order that no past events should interfere
with the thorough carrying out of all the measures brought forward by the
Queen during her visit. The local government was also strengthened by
the appointment of a new lieutenant-governor, and for a time all appeared
to go on well. After a while, however, other changes were made in the
local officials which gave rise to difficulties, and did much towards
destroying some of the good which had resulted from the Queen’s visit,
especially in regard to education. The consequence of this was the recent
appointment of a new governor and complete staff of officers, reported in a
former part of this chapter. We believe, however, that much good which
is the direct result of the Queen’s visit in 1873 is still visible among the
Betsileo.

The place most frequently visited by the Queen and court
is Ambohimanga, the ancient capital of the island, situated
twelve miles north of Antananarivo. It has long been the
custom for the sovereign to pay an annual visit to this
ancient town immediately after the famdroana (annual feast).
This custom is generally observed, though occasionally it is
omitted ; sometimes also the Queen visits Ambohimanga at
other times than the fandroana. The length of these visits
varies considerably according to circumstances and Her
Majesty’s pleasure, sometimes occupying only a few days, but
occasionally extending over two or three months. The Queen
usually leaves Antananarivo for Ambohimanga quietly during
the night, or in the early morning, but the day of Her
Majesty’s return is always a general holiday, and a time of
great rejoicing. There is a political aspect about these visits.
Ambohimanga is a royal city, and is always associated with
Antananarivo in public proclamations. Queen Ranavalona
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 49

I. is buried there, and it is the residence of one of the
boldest, proudest, and most conservative tribes in the island.
These frequent royal visits are marks of respect paid to the
ancient town and its inhabitants, and serve to conciliate
the Zszmahafotsy (name of the tribe}, and to keep them in
good temper. Since the Queen became a Christian, a
religious interest has also been attached to these visits,
and most of the kabary respecting education have been
made at Ambohimanga. During Her Majesty’s visit in
January, 1870, she sent a message to all the churches in the
neighbourhood, inviting the people to come up to the city,
and worship with her on the following Sunday. This was
something new, and pleased the people very much. The
invitation was gladly accepted, and a large multitude of
people met in Ambohimanga at the appointed time, and
joined in Christian worship with their Sovereign. This was
repeated every Sunday during that visit, and has been re-
peated, with modifications, at every visit of Her Majesty since
that time. We believe that this action on the part of the
Queen and court did a great deal towards strengthening the
native churches, and encouraging the people generally to
“pray.” In course of time, however, it was found desirable to
make a slight modification in the original plan. It was seen
that it was impossible for all the people in Ambohimanga
and the numerous villages around to join this service,
and that as a matter of fact many of them did not come; and
as all the town and country chapels were closed, a number
of the people spent their Sunday idly at home. It has, there-
fore, latterly been arranged that one of the chapels at Ambo-
himanga should be open for worship, and also those in the
villages, so that none might have an excuse for remaining at
home, and yet that all, who wished to do so, might have
the privilege of joining in worship with the Queen. The
Rev. J. WILLS, the missionary in charge of the Ambohi-
manga district, thus describes one of the recent visits of Her
Majesty :—

In October, 1878, the Queen, accompanied by the court, paid one of her
frequent visits to this ancient capital, the birth-place and burial-place of
Her Majesty’s ancestors. Travelling by night to avoid the midday heat,
the procession, with its long line of glimmering lanterns, formed a striking
48 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

spectacle as it slowly wound its way up to the foot of the hill on which the
city stands, about two o’clock in the morning. The remaining hours
spent on the hill-side till the appointed time for the royal entrance were
doubtless cold and wearisome to the large number of people who had
followed the Queen, as she only had been provided with a tent. But the
bright spring sun awoke them to a lively scege as hundreds of spectators
from all the surrounding parts came flocking in to see the Queen’s
entrance into her ancestral city. At eight o’clock she appeared in an
open palanquin, wearing a crown of gold, and shaded by the Malagasy
insignia of royalty, the scarlet umbrella; and preceded and followed by
numerous followers, also in palanquins, she entered the royal and once
heathen city, which even at the present day is forbidden ground to all
foreigners, and cannot be entered by Malagasy even who do not bring the
necessary passports.

During the Queen’s visit, one of the churches, Amboara, was opened
every Sunday for public worship. The congregations, however, were but
small, and mainly composed of preachers and visitors from Antananarivo,
who were glad of the opportunity of coming down from the city for a little
change. Most of the regular attendants, as might be expected, preferred
the novelty and excitement of the large gatherings in the court-yard of the
palace, where the Queen was a never failing worshipper, and where a
band of music accompanied the court singers, and the best native preach-
ers officiated. Our more humble services were attended with evident
interest, and on the few occasions on which I heard the discourses of the
native preachers I was much struck by their excellence, their spirituality,
and Scriptural character. The speakers were regular preachers from some
of the churches in Antananarivo, and I could but wish in my heart that
there were numbers more like them, especially in country districts. The
early morning service, which is held on Wednesday in our school-room,
was very well attended at this time, as also the Bible-class which follows.
It was a cheering and happy sight to see the room filled with pastors and
preachers, eagerly seeking to know the meaning of the Word of God.
There seemed to be a specially earnest spirit among the leading Christ-
ians, and three or four meetings were held daily, in different places, for
reading the Scriptures and prayer, and for the delivery of short devotional
addresses.

8.—VARIOUS OTHER SIGNS OF POLITICAL AND SOCIAL
PROGRESS.—As we look around in Madagascar, and compare
the present state of political and social life with what it was
ten years ago, we see many signs of progress, in addition to
those already mentioned, all of which we claim as the indirect
fruits of the Gospel.

The basis of all political action and social position in Mada-
gascar is the ancient and hereditary system of fanompoana, or
government service. This is a kind of feudal service which
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 49

embraces all classes of the people, including even the slaves.
In its old and more rigorous form it operated most severely
on the middle and lower classes, and was a check to all
industry and enterprise. The higher and wealthier classes
invariably put all heavy burdens on the shoulders of those
below them who were subject to their authority, and it often
happened that any dne who shewed superior intelligence and
ability, in any line of business, had additional work given him
to do without the slightest remuneration. Under this system, to
be clever was a calamity, and to be diligent was a sure means
of bringing increased oppression. This system included
not only all direct government service, but also all kinds of
service which might be required by those in positions of
authority of any who happened to be below them in the politi-
cal or social scale. Such labour as the making of bricks,
the building of houses, the fetching of wood from the forest,
the making of furniture, etc. etc., is included in what the
natives call their fanompoana. For all this no remuneration
was formerly received, beyond perhaps a little food during
the hours of labour, or a small share of a bullock when some
important work was completed. We are happy, however, to
have noticed during the last few years considerable amelio-
ration in the practical working of this system. The system
itself still exists without any radical change, but practically its
harshness has been greatly modified. A sense of justice and
right is growing among the people; public opinion is more
freely expressed than formerly ; those in higher positions do
not feel at liberty to exercise arbitrary authority on those
below them as they once did; there is more independence
among the people generally, and greater courage in opposing
what ‘appears to be unreasonable ; the wealthier families have
recently begun to pay for extra service required from their
subordinates (not, perhaps, to the full value, but a moderate
consideration), and masters are sometimes under the necessity
of paying their slaves for carrying them about in their palan-
quins, and for other additional labour demanded from them.
Among the causes which have brought about these desirable
changes may be mentioned the new regulations with regard
to the army and deka ; the example of the Queen in paying
for the erection of the Palace Church and other buildings;
50 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

the example of the Prime Minister, and also his repeated
addresses against bribery and oppression; the erection of
the Memorial Churches and other mission buildings, for which
the labourers have been duly paid; the extensive building
operations that have been carried on in the Capital and other
places during the last ten years; and, above all, the fuller
appreciation of the truths of Christianity and the advancement
of education throughout the country. '

The printing of all public adary, or royal proclamations,
is also a mark of progress on the part of the Government. The
desirability of printing these proclamations has often been
manifest, on account of the strange reports that have been
circulated in the country with regard to sabary made in
Antananarivo. It is impossible for the large numbers of
people, who usually assemble when a royal proclamation is
made, to hear all that is said; and many of those who hear
are incapable of carrying away a true impression, and of
reporting correctly to the people in the villages after they
have reached their homes. The most strange inaccuracies
are sometimes made, and the Queen has often been reported
to have said quite the reverse of what she really did say.
These strange reports have sometimes produced serious
consequences. Our chapels have sometimes been nearly
emptied, and educational work greatly hindered, by such
mutilated reports. It was a step in the right direction, there-
fore, when the Government decided that all royal proclama-
tions should, in future, be printed, and sold to the people at a
small charge. These printed proclamations, ‘in addition to
their immediate use, become historical documents, and will
serve to remind posterity of the great events of the past.

Extensive improvement has been made in house-building
during the last decade. This is most marked in Antananarivo
and the neighbourhood, but is also visible in other parts of
the country, especially in towns and villages that are near to
the mission stations. Antananarivo has been almost entirely
rebuilt. There are very few houses standing there now which
were in existence before 1870. The style of house and the
materials used in building are also changed, so that the Capital
assumes a new aspect. MR. W. Poot, the missionary builder
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 5t

who was sent out by the London Missionary Society, and who
has done much directly and indirectly to improve the dwellings
of the people, writes as follows :—

It would be wanting in us to omit altogether to notice the seeming
‘influence which church building has had on buildings in general. That it
has influenced many of the people in causing them to desire better dwellings
cannot be denied, though probably the erection of a house or two on the
English model may have prompted them still more. Whatever influence
has been exerted in that direction, it is patent to all that the city, built
formerly of wood, has, since the prohibition to build of any other material
was removed and the manufacture of bricks and tiles introduced, been
nearly rebuilt. What was of wood originally has been removed, and stone,
bricks, and tiles, substituted. Judging, therefore, from the past, as well
as from the present, one may fairly expect that old Antananarivo will soon
have disappeared entirely, and a new city have been built. The new
residences are all on the English model, with passages, halls, staircases,
and private rooms, an arrangement we rejoice in as aiding greatly the
advance of morality among the people. In the matter of house-building,
as in others, the ability of the natives to copy is very conspicuous. One
house took strongly with them, and hundreds of others have been built on
that model. Some corner decoration pleases, and its repetition is
attempted again and again; indeed anything new that seems to have
merit in it, be it house, chimney, fireplace, roof, iron fastenings, or
furniture, is almost sure to meet with an attempted duplicate, the first
edition being always the best, the revised edition failing in detail. Of the
large majority of buildings, however, it must be said—their owners began
to build, but neglected to finish. Scarcely a dwelling is completed. It is
as if the old feeling was not overcome, that it is a life-work for a man to
build a house. We are full of hope that the next generation may be wiser
in their time than the present, and that the education they receive in the
different schools will prompt them to do with their might what they
undertake, and not to commence what they do not intend to finish.

The above applies chiefly to Antananarivo_and the neigh-
bourhood, but the following paragraph from a report of the
Betsileo Mission shews that there has been similar progress
in that province :—

In 1870 there was only one brick building in the town of Fianarantsoa,
the church of Antranobrika, all the houses being built of wood or rushes.
Now, however, there are many large brick buildings in the town, and some
of them well built and plastered. More than five-sixths of the town now
consists of brick or mud walled houses, which have a very neat appearance.
The same kinds of houses are now general throughout the whole of South
Betsileo. Formerly the greater number of the houses were simply hovels,
made of a small kind of bamboo, and daubed with cow-dung.
52 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

Something has also been done in Antananarivo towards
improving the roads. A macadamised road, about five hun-
dred yards in length, has been completed, leading through
the Andohalo plain from the northern entrance to the Palace;
and a similar piece of road about the same length is nearly
completed, running westward from the same plain to the
western gate of the city. This is not much compared with
what is still needing to be done, but we are thankful that
a beginning has been made, and we trust that what has
already been accomplished will encourage the Government
to carry on the good work.

In manners and dress the Malagasy have also made great
progress. There is a marked improvement in their general
behaviour, and also in the cleanliness of their persons, dress,
and houses. Those who have come much in contact with
Europeans have learned a great deal from their modes of ~
living, and have adopted many of their customs. At Anta-
nanarivo the people are far more advanced in these respects
than the people in the country, who see much less of Euro-
peans ; but even in the country there has been most pleasing
improvement in regard to dress and cleanliness. The num-
ber of clean white /amba now to be seen in almost any
country congregation in Imerina, compared with ‘what made
their appearance ten or twelve years ago, is truly gratifying.
In the Capital, European clothing has been more extensively
adopted, both by the men and the women, but more especially
by the former. The women, as a rule, prefer the /améa, and
a few of them only appear in European dress on Sundays,
or on some special occasion; but many of the men are rarely
seen away from home in the native damba. This change and
improvement in dress is not only to be seen in Imerina, but
also in Betsileo, and in the principal towns and villages both
in the interior and on the coast. In Betsileo, the usual dress
formerly consisted of a strong dirty brown cloth, made of hemp
or rofia, and sometimes of the fibres of the banana tree.
Before being used it was well soaked in castor oil, and was a
common article of dress for all the members of the family (for
it must not be supposed that all had such clothes), until it
became a mass of filth and rags. As washing was not at that
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 53

time in fashion, the too near presence of the Betsileo was
sometimes far from pleasant. Soap was then not at all com-
mon, even among the Hova residents, and those of them who
preferred cleanliness to filth had often to use cow-dung and
sand, in the best way they could, to wash their clothes.
Now, except in a few cases, and that in the country districts,
these dirty oil-smeared clothes have passed out of fashion,
and large numbers of the Betsileo wear /amba of American
calico, which they wash regularly at the close of every week.
A few of the more wealthy Betsileo dress in the ordinary
English costume. So much improvement has been made
in dress within the past few years, that the appearance of
the people is altogether changed. In their spotless white
clothes it is often difficult to distinguish the Betsileo from
the more cleanly Hova. Yet with all the improvement made
in this respect, it would be too much to say that they are
remarkable either for dress or cleanliness.

In general morality we trust we may safely say that the
people in Imerina are making progress. We hesitate, how-
ever, to speak too positively on this subject, as the Malagasy
have still a great deal to learn before they reach the true
standard of Christian morality. Outwardly, there has been
a decided improvement, but we cannot doubt that secret
immorality prevails to a very large extent. Public opinion
is, we think, being enlightened and purified with regard
to this matter; but, with few exceptions, there is, even
among members of Christian churches, a very inadequate
idea of the evil of sin and of the beauty of moral purity.
A person may go astray, and live such an immoral life
as, according to English ideas, would unfit him for mixing
with any respectable society, and yet be received in the
highest circles in Madagascar as one without a stain on his
character. Parents, too, are often greatly remiss in regard
to the proper care and training of their children, and many
of them seem little disturbed when their sons or daughters
are guilty of such misconduct as has brought many English
parents with sorrow to their graves. In some respects, however,
there is manifest improvement. Polygamy, which was once
very common, is now rarely heard of, and cases of divorce,
54 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION,

though still occurring, are by no means so frequent as
formerly. Referring to matters of a different character,
we are happy to be able to say that such crimes as
murder, manslaughter, highway robbery, assault, and the
like, are of very rare occurrence in Imerina, and there are
also but few cases of capital punishment. Since the accession
of the present Queen in 1868, there have been only forty-five
instances of capital punishment, and these have been exclu-
sively either for murder or treason. Whilst, on the other hand,
theft, especially in the form of burglary, has been greatly on
the increase during the last few years. There is scarcely a
European residence in the Capital, or in the country, which
has not been broken into at one time or another, and some
of them more than once. This is perhaps one of the signs of
advancing civilisation (?), and may be partly accounted for by
the increased demand there is for European clothing and
other foreign articles. Excessive usury is also very common,
and frequently results in great distress, sometimes in total
ruin. Most of the prisoners who are frequently to be seen
going about in iron chains have been imprisoned for debt.
Some sound laws with regard to usury would be a benefit to
the country. The state of things in the Betsileo province
with regard to some of the matters mentioned above is thus
described :—

During these ten years great changes have taken place, both amongst
the Betsileo and the Hova residents in the province. One of the most
intelligent natives said the other day that there could be no comparison
between the condition of the people in 1870, and their condition at the
present time, such a thorough transformation in the morals of the
people had taken place during that period. In the dark days before 1870,
murder, highway robbery, and theft were of almost daily occurrence. No
one felt sure as to the safety of his person or property. Decency seemed
to have been but little observed, while large numbers, even of those in
positions of authority, gave themselves up to lives of drunkenness and
debauchery. Inthe midst of filth, lust, and excessive wickedness, the
few that were really Christians laboured in town and country to spread
the Gospel of purity and peace. As an example of the ferocity and
brutality of the populace, as also of their defiance of law, in 1870, or
early in 1871, three men were stoned, or rather battered, to death in the
public market-place in the daytime. Itis almost impossible to conceive
of such a thing at the present day. The state of lawlessness has become
a thing of the past. Murder is now of rare occurrence. The houses of the
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 55

highway robbers have been burned to the ground wherever they have
been met with, and one may travel with, perhaps, more safety than in
many parts of England. Few are bold enough to practise openly any of
the many evils which were common in 1870. The influence of the Church
has become one of the greatest in the country, and is exercised not only
on its own members, but is felt indirectly by every one.

Capital punishment has almost passed away, and that with no evil
results. It is generally commuted to chains for life, in some cases to a
certain number of years, and lynch-law is almost impracticable, especially
in the town, as the police have the strictest orders to protect the people,
and failing this would at once be put in chains themselves. On the whole
the laws are now well kept, and the punishments fairly. established. The
classification of crimes, and their equivalent punishment, was made by the
Queen on her visit to the province in 1873. From that time may be dated
the real establishment of law in Betsileo. Very little is now left in the
hands of the judges after the accused is found guilty or innocent, but
unfortunately it is not so during the progress of the trial. Often, landed
and house property, and sometimes personal freedom, is lost in a dispute
for an ox or two. One of the most marked things in and about Fianaran-
tsoa is the great number of men in chains, passing to and fro, each followed
by his keeper. To a stranger this might appear evidence of a large
percentage of crime amongst the people. This is not so, however, the
percentage being very low indeed, and not one-tenth of what it
was in 1870. By far the greater number of these prisoners are in chains
for debt. A debt which may have been at first only a few dollars, soon
grows into one of over a hundred. The borrowing of money, and the
excessive usury, is at present one of the curses of this province, and
seems to have grown rather than decreased of late years. Owing to this
state of things many are now in chains, and hundreds are suffering
allover the country. Nearly all the debtors are Betsileo, and the creditors
Hova. But, notwithstanding this, great general improvement has taken
place during the past ten years, as is evident in the decrease of
crime, and in the better administration of justice. What is now urgently

needed is a stoppage to all excessive usury, a fair percentage only to
be recoverable by law.

In the country districts, polygamy is still common, but not to the extent
it was ten years ago, when nearly every Betsileo had his two or three
wives. The change has come gradually, and no year can be pointed to
when any decided expression of feeling was made against it. It has
simply followed the gradual enlightenment and increasing intelligence of
the people. Amongst the Hova residents it is supposed to be extinct, but
many are known to have wives and families in Imerina, and a home and
children in Betsileo. In 1870, and some years afterwards, divorce was a
daily event, and considered as of little importance. As the influence of
the Church began to be felt, and it was seen how much importance was
attached to the marriage bonds by the Christians, divorce began to be
looked upon as a disgrace by both parties, and now it is of rare occurrence.
56 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

The outward observance of the Sabbath in the Imerina and
Betsileo provinces, and in a few other places as well, is more
perfect than in most of the towns in England. No markets
are held, and no stores or retail shops are open on this day.
A general stillness and cessation from labour usually prevail,
which impress every one with the fact that it is the day
of rest. Now and again, but very rarely, a man may
be seen digging his manioc, or preparing his rice-ground,
or carrying firewood on the Sunday. One of the most
frequent signs of Sunday labour is be seen in the bearers of
goods travelling between Tamatave and Antananarivo. These
usually continue their journey on the Sunday, though they
very rarely enter the Capital on that day. We are informed
that some of the foreign traders in Antananarivo have latterly
been in the habit of sending off hides and other goods on
the Sunday, which has considerably increased the Sunday
traffic in the neighbourhood of the Capital.

In some places, the outward observance of the Sabbath is
the result of pressure on the part of government officials,
rather than the spontaneous expression of the religiousness of
the people. In the first instance, the Sunday markets were
stopped by order of the Queen; and the fact that no public
business is transacted on Sunday has had great influence
on the people generally. In Antananarivo and the -sur-
rounding villages, no pressure whatever is brought to bear
upon the people beyond that of public opinion and general
example, and yet in no part of the country is the Sabbath
more strictly observed. In some of the villages in Imerina,
the Sakazzam-bohitra exercise their authority in preserving
an outward decorum and in preventing labour being done
on the Sunday, and in some instances also in bringing the
people to church, though this is by no means universal. In
Betsileo, more pressure is used with the people in the villages
than is the case in Imerina. Sabbath observance in Fiana-
rantsoa and other principal towns in the south is much the
same as in Antananarivo, but in the Betsileod villages the
‘police’ (this English name is applied by the natives to these
men) generally go about on the Sunday morning to collect
the people for worship, leaving them to choose for themselves
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 57

- what place of worship they will attend. One of the mission-
aries in Betsileo refers to this subject in the following
terms :—

Sabbath observance is now the rule throughout the province, more
because it is the law of the land than from any other reason. Although
violations of the law are treated leniently, the offenders being generally
let off with a little advice, it is understood that all work is to be stopped
on that day, and the people are expected to attend some place of worship.
The police are instructed to be vigilant, and many of them do not fail to use
their authority in compelling the people to go to church. There can be no
doubt that if the people, more especially in the country, were left to
themselves, the day would be turned into one of drunkenness and riot.
In Fianarantsoa, or at any of the mission stations, more attention is
paid to the Sabbath than even in Scotland. The present state of
things dates from the visit of the Queen in 1873; before that time the
observance of the day was not general. During the past few years, the Jesuit
priests, both by precept and example, have pressed upon the people that
they are at liberty to spend the day, after the services in the church, in
any way they please, either in work or amusement. However, in spite of this,
the fear of the law has more influence than the word of the priest.

In closing this chapter, a few remarks on the export and
import trade of the island will not be out of place, though we are
sorry not to have been able to obtain all the detailed informa-
tion on the subject we should like to have had. It has already
been stated that the number of European and Creole traders in
Madagascar has greatly increased during the last ten years.
This of itselfis an indication that the trade also has increased,
especially as most of those visiting the island for purposes of
trade seem tempted to remain. Most of these traders reside at
Tamatave, the chief port on the east coast and the residence
of H. B. M’s. Consul, though several of them are settled in
the chief towns along the coast north and south of Tamatave ;
and within the last few years a considerable number of them
have settled in Antananarivo, where in 1870 there was not a
single foreign trader. There are two respectable English
firms established at Tamatave (the oldest of these, viz., that
of Messrs. Procter Bros., was established in 1862), and also
two American-firms, all having representatives in the Capital,
and apparently doing an extensive business. Most of the
Creoles are engaged in retail business, and have their stores
supplied by the larger firms. For several years past, one,
and sometimes two, vessels have been sent out annually from
58 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

England chartered for Madagascar, and one or two also from
America. Goods have also been received by other vessels
via Mauritius and Zanzibar. It is patent to every one that
both the export and import trade of Madagascar has very
largely increased since 1870. The principal exports from
Madagascar at the present time are bullocks, hides, gum-
copal, indiarubber, coffee, rice, sugar and rice bags, and a
few other articles in small quantities. The trade in hides
has very much increased of late years. In 1870 this trade
was very limited, but it has now become very extensive.
The present exports, however, are scarcely any index of the
resources of the country. With the application of European
skill and capital, the export trade might be increased to
almost any extent. Some of the productions of Madagascar
might be very speedily increased for export, and that too
with comparatively little trouble, such as cotton, silk, indigo,
tobacco, sugar, and spices. The first great want, however,
is good roads, and easy communication between the inland
provinces and the coast. The import trade comprises a great
variety of articles, but mostly in small quantities, such
as medicines, materials for building, iron pots for cooking,
woollen blankets, European clothing, ladies’ and gentlemen’s
hats, boots and shoes, &c., &c. There is scarcely any article
of European manufacture which does not find its way to
Madagascar at one time or another. The staple of the import
trade, however, during the last few years and up to the
present time, in addition to Mauritius rum, consists of Ameri-
can calico, and cheap prints. These are imported in large
quantities, and are to be found in every market throughout
the country. They are also sold at remarkably cheap rates.
A piece of American calico, consisting of forty yards, can be
bought in Antananarivo for about five dollars, and is retailed
in the markets at from sixpence to eightpence per yard.
Prints vary in price from sixpence to a shilling per yard,
according to quality. Oxford shirting-can also be bought at
from sixpence to eightpence per yard. The extensive importa-
tion of American calico and various kinds of prints at such
cheap rates has produced quite a revolution in the dress of the
Malagasy. Thousands of the people, who formerly covered
themselves with mats or coarse rofia cloth, can now be seen
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 59

respectably clad in a clean white Jamba made of American
calico, with perhaps a neat print dress underneath. The follow-
ing paragraph gives additional information respecting trade
in Betsileo, and the productions of that province :—

During the year 1870, and for several of the following years, a consider-
able trade in hides was carried on in Betsileo. This led to the settlement
of afew Creole traders in Fianarantsoa, in the year 1872. The trade
became dull in 1874, and the traders left for the coast, so that at present
all the business is in the hands of the natives. For the past two years no
hides have been sent to the coast, but some of the natives have now
prepared a few, in the hope of a revival of the trade. With a little enter-
prise a good trade in tobacco and coffee might be established, the latter
selling here at three-halfpence per lb. The principal produce of this
province, for export, is native silk and cotton. The former is produced
chiefly in the large plain called Zszencmparzhy, the whole of which is
planted with the eméafry, one of the leguminosiae, on which the cater-
pillar feeds. Of late years there has been a great increase in this trade,
and large patches of the amdafry may be found all over the country, from
Imahazony to Ambohinamboarina. The cocoons sell in the market at 2600
for a dollar. These are bought by Hova traders, who visit the south in
January and February in order to save the markets. The cocoons are
packed in large circular baskets, each containing from twelve to fifteen
dollars’ worth. As an estimate of the trade going on in this com-
modity, we may mention that in the early part of the year, in a journey
of one day to the south, sixty-two men laden with silk were met, each
man having two baskets. These men could not have had less than
#310 worth of raw silk. Cotton comes chiefly from the west, and in
no great quantities. Beeswax and some indiarubber are at times in the
market, but these are sent to the coast direct, or find their way to Imerina.
The principal foreign goods in the market are American cotton, cheap
prints, beads and small trinkets, medicines, and Mauritius rum. There
never will be much trade until there are better roads.

CHAPTER II.

OTHER EVENTS AFFECTING THE INTERESTS
OF THE MISSION.
+48
N addition to the political and social events referred to
in the previous chapter, several other events, though of
a different character, have transpired during the last ten
60 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

.

years, which have materially affected the interests of the
Madagascar Mission. Some uf these events have had a most
favourable influence on the work of the missionaries, and
have contributed much to its success, whilst others have
been a source of great trouble and annoyance, and seemed at
the time likely to do much harm. It is undesirable to enter
minutely into the circumstances of every event that has thus
affected the interests of the Mission, but it will be our
endeavour so to place them before our readers -as to shew
the bearing they have had on our work, and the fruits that
have resulted from them. The following are those which
require our special notice :—

1.—THE Last APPEAL OF THE REv. W. ELLIS ON
BEHALF OF MADAGASCAR.—The Madagascar Mission owes
much to Mr. Ellis; and in his death, which took place on the
gth of June, 1872, not only the Mission, but Madagascar
as a nation, lost one of its warmest friends. Though his
residence in the island, including his four visits, did not
extend much over three years, yet his actual labours in
the service of the Mission covered a much longer time. The
books he wrote, and the numerous speeches and appeals
he made on behalf of Madagascar, were of far greater
value, and accomplished more lasting good, than his personal
labours in the island. It is not too much to say that
a large portion of the money which has been given for
Madagascar, and some of the missionaries who have laboured
here, were secured by means of his influence and appeals.
The Memorial Churches will ever remain as monuments
of his unselfish power and earnest labours for the good of
. Madagascar. His interest in its people never flagged to
the time of his death, and the last appeal he made to
the Christian public in England on their behalf was as
full of fervour as any of his previous ones, and is, we
believe, bearing fruit at the present time. Soon after
the burning of the idols in 1869, and the subsequent very
large increase in the adherents of the Mission, a number
of new missionaries were sent out to Madagascar; but the
number of-churches and adherents went on increasing, and
the missionaries were far too few for the work which needed
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 61

to be done. ‘Appeals were again made, but at first they had
little effect. It was thought by some that Madagascar was
having more than its share of missionaries, and that other
countries had greater claims. At this time, Mr. Ellis, inspired
by his earnest interest in Madagascar, prepared, what proved
to be, his last “Statement and Appeal’ on behaif of the Mada-
gascar Mission. This is dated February 7, 1872,.five months
before his death. It consists of a series of paragraphs, stating
briefly, but clearly, the conditions and needs of the Mission,
and concluding with an earnest appeal for £5000 for the
immediate strengthening of the Mission, and for an increase
of £ 2000 to the annual income of the Society in order to
sustain it in its enlarged form. The Directors endorsed this
appeal, and earnestly recommended it “to the friends and
supporters of Christian Missions, in order that the Mission in
Madagascar might be speedily strengthened.’’ The appeal
was also warmly supported by the Madagascar missionaries
who were then in England. We need scarcely add that it
was not in vain. More than the required amount was raised,
and the Mission was again strengthened by the sending out
of several more missionaries. The appeal thus made in the
early part of the year was still further supported by Dr.
MULLENS, at the Annual Meeting of the Society in Exeter
Hall, in an eloquent and most effective speech, which helped to
keep up and increase the interest already felt in the Mada-
gascar Mission. This we believe to have led to that further
action on the part of the Directors which resulted in the
appointment of a Deputation to Madagascar.

2.—THE VISIT OF THE DEPUTATION.—The special cir-
cumstances of the Madagascar Mission, together with the
measures taken for its enlargement, suggested to the Directors
the desirability of sending a Deputation to confer with the
missionaries on the spot, as to the best means of promoting
the true interests of the Mission. This proposal of the
Directors was referred to by Dr. Mullens in his Report at
the Annual Meeting of the Society i in 1 May, 1873, in the
following terms :—

The peculiar circumstances in which the Madagascar Mission is placed,
have suggested to the Directors that they should adopt a course which has
62 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

more than once been taken by our own and by other Societies, of ‘sending
a Deputation personally to visit the island. In carrying out the measures
resolved on during the last three years for the enlargement of the Mission,
both the Directors at home, and the missionaries abroad, have found the
ordinary methods of communication insufficient to secure the full co-opera-
tion necessary to render the new arrangements successful. On the one
side, the able letters and journals sent from the Mission have failed to
convey to the Directors all the information as to details which they were
anxious to obtain. On the other side, the missionaries have needed a far
more intimate acquaintance with the views of the Board in applying those
principles on which the Board wishes them to act in every detail of the
life around them. It has been long felt by many that nothing less than
prolonged personal conference and consultation between a deputation of
the Directors and the missionary brethren on the spot will secure the great
ends which the enlargement of the Mission has in view. This conference
is desired by the missionary brethren as well as by the Board; and the
pleasant relations which have always existed between the missionaries, the
officers of the Society, and the Directors, give augury of the happiest
results, if it can be properly secured.

At a subsequent meeting of the Board, the Directors ap-
pointed their Foreign Secretary, the REv. DR. MULLENS, and
‘the Rev. JOHN PILLANS, a member of the Board, to proceed
to Madagascar as a Deputation on their behalf. The objects
for which the Deputation were appointed, and the powers with
which they were entrusted, are thus defined by the Directors :—

The objects which these brethren have been requested to keep in view
have relation both to the English missionaries and to the native churches ;
and the Deputation themselves also hold a two-fold position, especially to
the former—that of being messengers of the English churches connected
with the Society, as well as representatives of the Board.

I.—As messengers from the churches, they are desired to encourage and
strengthen the hands of the missionary brethren, by assurances of the deep
interest with which they are regarded ; by urging on the native churches a
steady adherence to the great truths in which they have been instructed; a
strong faith in the Saviour ; purity of church fellowship ; personal activity,
and consecration in sustaining the means of grace and spreading them
abroad.

II. —As representatives of the Board, they will endeavour :—

(1.) To aid the missionaries by their counsel on all matters which
concern the development of the Mission, and its more complete adaptation
to the demands at present made upon it.

(2.) To make careful inquiry into all that concerns general education,
and the means by which it may be extended ; including the principles and
mode in which a national system of education may be founded.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 63

(3-) To obtain information on all matters connected with the exterior
interests and the internal management of the Mission.

(4.) To consider carefully and report on the relation of the Society to
other Missionary Societies in the island.

In carrying out these important objects, the DEPUTATION have been
desired to pay personal visits to the various branches of the Mission, and
the native churches which they contain; to attend the meetings of the
District Committees ; and, in the fullest degree, to confer with the mem-
bers of the Mission on everything which may promote the efficiency of their
plans. On all these matters they will fully report to the Board the infor-
mation which they may gather, and the conclusions at which they arrive.

At the usual quarterly devotional meeting of the Directors, held at the
Mission House, on Monday, June 3oth, the brethren forming the Depu-
tation were specially commended, by earnest prayer, to the protection and
blessing of God. On the morning of the following Wednesday, the
Deputation left London for Marseilles, with the view of proceeding to
Mauritius by the French steamer of the sth of July.

The Deputation landed at Tamatave, the eastern port of
Madagascar, on the 14th of August; and after a rest of a few
days proceeded on their way to the Capital, where they were
warmly welcomed both by the missionaries of the London
Missionary Society and of the Friends’ Foreign Mission
Association, and by the native churches. "When the question
of sending a Deputation to Madagascar was first mooted, the
missionaries did not see the necessity for such an unusual
proceeding, and thought that the good likely to result would
not be commensurate with the expense incurred; but after
more mature consideration it was felt that the Directors had
acted wisely, and the missionaries began to hope for much
good to the Mission as the result of the visit. At the first
meeting of the Imerina District Committee which was held
in Antananarivo after the arrival of the Deputation, the
following resolution of welcome was unanimously agreed to :—

That the members of this Committee recognise in the sending to this
country of a Deputation from the Society, another proof of the warm
interest taken by the Directors in the Madagascar Mission, and of their
wishes for its prosperity and consolidation. They heartily welcome the
Deputation, and will be glad to confer with them on the various subjects
named in the resolutions of the Board, as well as on many others which
require discussiun, aad oa waich both the Directors and this Committee
need further information. Tiey trust that the visit of Dr. Mullens and
64 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

Mr. Pillans will in many ways prove of great service to the Mission, and
will also shew to the native churches the undiminished interest taken in
their welfare by the churches of England who first sént them the Gospel.

The sentiments expressed in the above resolution, and the
promises of help on the part of the missionaries, were fully
carried out in their subsequent intercourse with the members
of the Deputation. Everything in the power of the mission-
aries was done by them to make the visit a success, and,
we believe, to the perfect satisfaction of the Deputation them-
selves. The visit extended over twelve months, wanting two
days, and during the whole of the time the Deputation were
busily occupied carrying out the mission entrusted to them by
the Board. Long journeys, some of them occupying several
weeks, were taken to Betsileo, Antsihanaka, Vonizongo, and
other parts of the country. When not travelling, their time
was usually occupied in visiting the churches, schools, and
other institutions in the Capital, or in consultation with the
missionaries, the native pastors and teachers, or in some
other way by which they could obtain information respecting
the character, habits, and customs of the people, and secure an
insight into the inner life of the Mission. The vast amount
of information of various kinds collected by the members
of the Deputation during their comparatively short visit, is
seen in Dr. Mullens’s Twelve Months in Madagascar, which
contains a full and detailed account of their visit. This visit
is now remembered by many in Madagascar with pleasure
and satisfaction, and more especially so, since the lamented
death of Dr. Mullens, whose warm and earnest addresses are
by no means forgotten, and who had, by his intercourse with
the people, shewn himself a true friend of the Malagasy.

3.—THE MISSIONARY CONFERENCE.—By far the most im-
portant event connected with the visit of the Deputation was
the Missionary Conference, held in Antananarivo, January,
1874. In addition to the Deputation, there were present at this
Conference the missionaries of the London Missionary Society
in Imerina, and those of the Friends’ Foreign Mission Asso-
ciation; also the missionaries of the Medical Mission, and
two representatives of the Betsileo Mission. The meetings
of the Conference commenced on Tuesday, January 13th, and
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 65

were continued till near the close of the following week. All
the principal plans adopted in these Missions were carefully
examined, and many suggestions were offered for their
enlargement, extension, and improvement. The discussions
were frank, searching, and full of life, and the conclusions
at which the Conference arrived were embodied in formal
resolutions. The place of meeting was the Memorial Church
at Faravohitra. During the first five days two sessions were
held daily, the former from 8.30 a.m. till 12 a.m.; the latter
from 1.30 p.m. till 4 p.m. The first half hour each day was
spent in devotional exercises, and the first session was wholly
occupied withthesame. The ladies of both Missions attended
the meetings throughout, and took a deep interest in the
proceedings. The Rev. Dr. Mullens presided ; and the Rev.
W. E. Cousins and the Rev. B. Briggs were secretaries. At
the first session, Dr. Mullens delivered an appropriate opening
address, and at each of the following sessions papers were
read, and afterward freely discussed. The following are the
subjects which occupied the attention of the Conference, and
on which formal resolutions were passed:—The Theological
Institution; The General Education of Young Men; The
Normal Schools ; The City Work of an English Missionary ;
The Work of the Country Missionary; The Redistribution
of present Agencies; Village Churches and Mission Houses ;
The Discipline of the Native Churches; The Instruction of
the Native Churches; The Employment of the Native
Churches in helping others; Female Education; Public
Worship ; The Revision of the Malagasy Bible; Bible Circu-
lation and General Christian Literature; The Extension of
the Mission to New Centres and New Tribes. The proceed-
ings of the Conference were brought to a close by a special
devotional service, and the passing of the following final
resolution :—

~ That the members of this Conference, in closing their meetings, desire
to record their devout thankfulness to God for the help which He has
graciously given to their deliberations ; for the valuable information con-
tributed respecting the work done in Madagascar ; and for the harmony
in which their proceedings have been carried on. And they pray that not
only may their own hearts be stirred to increased consecration to the

Lord’s service; but that the Spirit may be poured out in large measure
upon the churches and people of the island; and that a time of refreshing,
66 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

granted from above, may elevate them to higher degrees of Christian
character, and extend the Gospel to multitudes that have not heard it
hitherto.

Following close upon the Conference, a series of business
meetings were held by the Imerina District Committee, at
which many of the conclusions arrived at by the general
discussions at the Conference were accepted for application
to the conduct of the Mission. Many important resolutions
were passed at these meetings, which have materially affected
the work and positions of the missionaries, and have been
of great benefit to the Mission at large. The following are
some of the matters considered at these Committee Meetings,
and with regard to which formal resolutions were agreed to :—
The appointment of Standing Sub-Committees and the
General Conduct of Business ; The Redistribution of Districts
and the Settlement of New Missionaries; The Establishment
ofa New Mission in the Antsihanaka Country ; Examinations
in the Native Language; A Scheme of a General College;
A Revisal of the method of assisting Elementary Schools;
New Chapels; Mission Houses; and Arrangements for the
Management of the Printing Office, the Palace School,
and other institutions of the Mission. All the resolutions
which were passed at these meetings were printed at
the Mission Press, and forwarded to the Directors of
the Society for their sanction. At a meeting of the Board
on Monday, November 30th, 1874, after the return to Eng-
land of the Deputation, the proposed rearrangements were
submitted to the consideration of the Directors, and were all
sanctioned by them with a few modifications in matters of
detail. The following resolution was also passed by the
Board at the same meeting :—

“The Directors of the London Missionary Society, in closing their
review of the Madagascar Mission, desire to place on record the hearty
satisfaction and thankfulness to God which that review has given them.
It is not on the agencies of the Mission, however complete, that they
rest: it is not alone in the amount of faithful work done by Christian
missionaries and pastors, English and native, that they find pleasure.
They have received from the Deputation, and from the missionaries at
home, fresh evidence that the Spirit of God is filling those agencies with
new life and vigour. They have found their faith strengthened and their
hearts cheered by new proofs that life is at work in the native churches,
in even distant and retired stations, in the voluntary efforts of the native
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 67

brethren everywhere to edify one another. They are anxious effectively
to aida willing people, a people richly blessed from above. And they
pray that, in continuance of the wonderful grace bestowed in the past,
a new and richer outpouring of the Holy Spirit may be granted to all the
Brethren of all the missions in the island and the flock of Christ under
their charge: that these churches of the Redeemer may stand conspicuous
among the fruits of the Gospel gathered in modern times, not only
for their wonderful trials, but for the strength of their faith, the breadth
of their knowledge, and for the general excellence of their Christian life.

Many of the rearrangements proposed by the District
‘ Committee and the Deputation, and sanctioned by the Board
at the meeting above referred to, have been faithfully carried
out. In some of them, however, considerable modifications
have been made, from time to time, as the exigencies of the
Mission seemed to demand; and in a few instances the
carrying out of the proposed rearrangements has been
rendered impossible on account of the vacancies caused in
the Mission by sickness, death, and the retirement of
some of the missionaries, whose places have not yet been
filled up by new appointments. But, notwithstanding this,
we feel, on a review of all the interests involved, that much
good has resulted from the visit of the Deputation, and
from the various measures proposed during that visit for
the enlargement and consolidation of the Mission. Among
the benefits that have resulted from the visit the following
are the most prominent :—The sanction of the Directors
to several important proposals previously made to them
by the Imerina District Committee for the rearrangement
and strengthening of the Mission, but which they at first
hesitated to accept; a better understanding between the
Board and the missionaries with regard to the principles on
which the Mission, in its enlarged form, should be conducted ;
greater faith, on the part of the Directors, in the missionaries
and the native churches, and a more thorough appreciation
of the nature and necessities of the work carried on in Mada-
gascar; increased interest in the Madagascar Mission on the
part of the Christian churches in England; enlarged grants
for education and native agency ; a deeper sense, on the part
of the native Christians, of the undiminished interest taken
in their welfare by the churches in England from which they
first received the Gospel ; a closer co-operation between the
68 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

missionaries of the London Missionary Society and those
of the Friends’ Foreign Mission Association, and also an
increased friendship between them and the missionaries of
the Norwegian Missionary Society. For all these results
we have reason to be devoutly thankful.

4.—THE ISSUE OF THE SHILLING BIBLE IN 1874.—The
native Christians in Madagascar owe much to the British
and Foreign Bible Society for the deep interest which that
Society has always taken in their welfare, and the liberal
terms on which it has supplied them with the written Word
of God. Except the First Edition of the Scriptures and a
small Paragraph Testament, which were printed at the press
of the London Missionary Society in Antananarivo, all the
Scriptures in circulation among the Malagasy have been pro-
vided by the British and Foreign Bible Society ; and part of
the expenses of the first edition was also paid by that Society.
Some editions of separate books have occasionally been
supplied for free distribution, and in other cases the price
has been so moderate as to place the Word of Life within
the reach of all except the very poorest, and for them free
grants have sometimes been made. The greatest boon of
all, however, has been the Shzlling Bible. In reviewing the
past ten years of missionary work in Madagascar, and
estimating the influence which certain events have had on
that work, we cannot omit the issuing of this small Bible at
so cheap a rate, which will probably have a more permanent
influence on the well-being of the Malagasy than any other
event which has taken place within the time now under
review. Before the arrival of this Bible in February, 1874,
the only complete Bible in the Malagasy language to be
bought at the Depdt was of a large size, and was sold at four
shillings. This was a high price for the majority of the
people, who had therefore to content themselves with the
New Testament only. When the small Bible arrived, and
the price was fixed at a shz/lzmg, the news was announced in
the numerous chapels throughout the country, and was
received with great delight. For several] weeks a large
portion of the missionaries’ time was occupied in selling
Bibles. Some of the people came many miles with their
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 69

shilling, in order to purchase a Bazboly tapitra (complete
Bible). The following extract from a letter written by the
Rev. H. W. Grainge (who was then in charge of the Depdt) to
the Rev. S. B. Bergne of the Bible Society, shews the delight-
ful sensation which the arrival of these Bibles caused among
the native Christians. The letter is dated March 2, 1874 :—

I am happy to inform you that the first instalment of the new Bibles has
just been received. It has been long expected and greatly needed. Our
stock had become so small, that instead of stimulating we had been
obliged to check the circulation, lest we should not be able to supply one
for pulpit use in each church. I know not when I have been so pleased
as when I saw these Bible cases come into the Printing Office yard. On
the Sunday following, there was quite a scene of excitement in several of
the city churches, when it was announced that the long expected Bibles
had really come at last, and on the day of issue the place was thronged
from morning till night. I had expected as much, and made what
preparation I could, but was then scarcely able to overtake the demand.
The pastors of the church I now have in charge, fearing that all would
soon be gone, begged that they might take a whole case to the church for
their own people. This they did, and disposed of all in a very few
minutes. The Queen sent at once for three cases, and afterwards for
another, while from the country orders came in so fast that the warehouse
was soon almost cleared. During the past week we have sold scarcely

anything but Bibles. We have only a few odd copies left out of about
40 cases.

An edition of 20,000 of these shilling Bibles has been all
but exhausted within the last six years. We cannot doubt
the good which will result from this wide-spread, and, we trust,
general reading, of the Word of God.

5-— CORRESPONDENCE IN THE ENGLISH NEWSPAPERS ON
AFFAIRS IN MADAGASCAR.—The events to which we have
referred, in the previous parts of this chapter, are such
as have had a most favourable influence on the interests
of the Mission. We have now to mention matters of
a very different character, which had their origin in a
spirit of dissension, and which might have produced most
injurious effects on the cause of truth in Madagascar,
had not steps been immediately taken to check their
baneful influence. At the close of 1877 and the begin-
ning of 1878, a somewhat lengthy correspondence appeared
in the English Independent, the Nonconformist, the Christian
World, and other newspapers, criticising political and
7O THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

ecclesiastical affairs in Madagascar. The parties by whom
the discussion was originated were supposed to be well
informed on the subjects about which they wrote, being
either resident in Madagascar at the time, or having
only recently left the island. On this account consider-
able importance was attached to their statements, and
they were received by many in England as substantially
correct, though most of them contained but a mere modicum
of truth, and that so perverted as to produce an entirely
false impression In addition to very severe strictures on
the conduct of the Prime Minister and political affairs in
Madagascar, most serious charges were brought against the
missionaries of the London Missionary Society, and the
manner in which the Madagascar Mission was conducted.
If the charges and imputations so freely made had been
true, then the missionaries would have been unworthy
of their position, and the Madagascar Mission no longer
deserving the sympathy and support which it had previously
received. The Directors in England felt the gravity of the
charges brought against a number of their missionaries
in one of their largest missions, and in their own defence,
as well as in the interests of the Mission, they published
areply. Several other friends of the Mission, some of them
formerly missionaries in Madagascar who were then in
England, also answered some of the charges. All these
replies, however, seemed to the missionaries in Madagascar
insufficient to meet the gravity of the occasion, and after
careful deliberation they decided on publishing, in the
form of a pamphlet, a full and detailed reply to all the
charges brought against themselves and the Mission entrusted
to their care. This pamphlet, entitled Zhe Madagascar
Mission: A Statement in reply to Recent Criticisms, was
widely circulated among the Directors and friends of the
missionaries in England, and was also published verbatim
in the English Independent. We have been assured by
many of our friends, and by the Directors of the Society
in a formal resolution, that this reply was perfectly satis-
- factory; and the fact that it closed a long and painful
correspondence, which has not been revived, shews that it
was all that the occasion required. The following extract
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 71

from the Statement of the missionaries shews the charges
which were brought against them :—

It may be well in the first place to enumerate the various charges and
imputations that have been made by those who have recently written
on Madagascar affairs, in order that we may see exactly our position,
and what the statements are which we have to examine andreply to. With
regard to political matters, the subjects commented on are chiefly: the
character of the Prime Minister; the liberation of the Mozambique slaves ;
and the reorganisation of the army. The Prime Mirister is represented
as a vindictive and blood-thirsty tyrant, holding human life as of
little value, and ever ready to sacrifice it for the accomplishment of his
own ambitious ends. The proclamations with regard to the Mozam-
biques are asserted to have been all ‘‘sham;’’ to have been made ‘‘for the
purpose of deceiving Englishmen, of for the purpose of freeing the Mozam-
biques ;’’ and it is said that ‘‘the Mozambiques are no more free than they
were previous to the proclamation.’’ With regard to the reorganisation
of the army, the English public are given to understand that a large
conscription has been made to replenish and enlarge the army; that
‘thousands of young men who are the flower and hope of their country,’
and many of ‘‘the best class of Christians in Madagascar,’”’ are ‘‘wearing
out their lives by daily drill ;’? that “Antananarivo is as much the scene
of drilling and preparation for war as if the nation were actually engaged
in such a conflict ;’’ and all this is represented as carried on with the
greatest oppression, and as accompanied with the most barbarous cruelty.
Turning to charges and imputations affecting the missionaries and their
work, we find that the missionaries are accused of conniving ‘‘at efforts
to blind the English public,’’ with regard both to political and eccle-
siastical affairs; and we are informed that ‘‘unfortunately for the poor
missionary the time is nearly past when the Christian public in England
can be successfully gulled by beautiful little tales about the model
government in Madagascar.’’ It is asserted that we have a “State
Establishment in Madagascar which is less tolerant than that of either -
Turkey, Spain, or England ;’’ that our churches are under state control ;
that our chapels are built and our native pastors paid by the Government ;
and that the missionaries, who are professedly Nonconformists and
supported by a Nonconformist Missionary Society, encourage and foster
this state of things, whilst at the same time they conceal the facts from
the Christian public in England. It has also been insinuated that if we
preach what we believe to be the truth we get no congregations; and,
in the opinion of one writer, what we are expected to preach is not ‘‘the
Gospel of Jesus Christ according to the New Testament, but according
to the Prime Minister.’’ Such are some of the charges which have been
made as to the state of things in Madagascar.

It will be noticed that some of these charges were of a

political character, and did not directly affect the Mission or
the missionaries. The central and most important charges, and
72 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

those which attracted the greatest attention, and most seriously
disturbed the minds of our friends, were that the missionaries
in Madagascar were fostering a state establishment of reli-
gion, and concealing the fact from the Christian public in
England. To these charges it was considered desirable to
reply at length. This was done, and the following are some
of the principal clauses referring to these false accusations :—

o

1.—With one or two exceptions, the missionaries of the London Mission-
ary Society in Madagascar are nonconformists, and some of us are
descendants of nonconformists of many generations. We have been
trained in Nonconformist Colleges, and probably should never have
enlisted ourselves in the services of any church or society which was not
founded on broad free-church principles. Not only were we noncon-
formists in England, but here in Madagascar also we adhere as tenaciously
as ever to the principles held by nonconformists. Were we in England
now most of us would be in hearty co-operation with the Liberation So-
ciety; and though we are in Madagascar, where the circumstances of the
churches are very different from those in England, we are none the less
jealous of our principles. We further avow, notwithstanding all that has
been said to the contrary, that there is nothing in our position in Mada-
gascar which is in any way inconsistent with our principles as nonconform-
ists. Our principles are well known to the Government, and, as we
have already said, are both understood and advocated by some of the
most intelligent of our native pastors and teachers, and we have never
identified ourselves with any thing by which these principles have been
compromised. It is false to say that we foster the connection of the
Church and State in Madagascar, or that we have sacrificed our prin-
ciples to mere expediency. We have done nothing of the kind. These
principles have not yet that hold upon the churches which we wish them
to have, and there are many things in Madagascar which are not in
perfect harmony with them; but these inconsistences are not ours, nor
from us. They are simply the result of that dense ignorance of the
people and those other circumstances to which we have already referred.

2.—Weare fully conscious of the difficulties with which we have to contend
in carrying out our nonconformist principles in Madagascar, and these
difficulties we haye never attempted to conceal. So long ago as April,
1869, soon after the burning of the idols and the great influx of people to
our churches, we wrote a special letter to the Directors, informing them of
the state of things as existing at that time, expressing our grave fears for
the spiritual welfare of the churches, laying before them our difficulties, and
stating the policy which we thought it wise to adopt. Since then, in our
numerous reports, as well as in personal and official letters to the Directors,
we have repeatedly put before them our difficulties and our fears. The
missionaries who have been in England on furlough have spoken repeatedly,
both to the Directors privately, and to the constituency of the Society
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 73

throughout the country in their deputation speeches, of the difficulties and
dangers which beset the churches in Madagascar. During the visit of the -
Deputation in 1873-4, every aspect of our Mission and every department of
our work was looked at and carefully considered. The dark as well as the
bright side of things was examined and freely discussed ; and every oppor-
tunity was given to the representatives of the Society for making them-
selves perfectly acquainted with every question relating to our missionary
work, If therefore there has been any doubt or ignorance, either on the
part of the Directors, or of the Christian public in England, with regard
to the real state of things in Madagascar, and if there be any truth in the
statement that only the bright and encouraging side of mission life has
been publicly reported, it cannot possibly have been the fault of the mission-
aries, who have done all in their power to make things known as they
really exist. Nor do we think that the Directors are to be blamed in this
matter. The blame, if there be any, probably attaches to the Christian
public themselves, who for want of interest, or from the pressure of other
duties, do not read the reports when presented, but yet, when false state-
ments are made or something startling occurs, allow themselves to be
surprised, and their confidence in the Society and its missionaries to be
shaken.

3-—Not only have the missionaries been true to themselves, and faithful
in the reports of their work sent to the Directors in England, but their
utterances to the natives on the nature and government of the Christian
church have given no'uncertain sound. Knowing the peculiar difficulties
and dangers of the native churches, we have given special prominence to
subjects of this nature in our public ministrations, and especially on great
occasions. It would be easy to give extracts from sermons and addresses
by the missionaries, delivered at the opening of churches and at the
meetings of our Congregational Union, illustrating the very plain and
pointed language which has been used by us to impress upon the minds
of the people the teaching of the New Testament with regard to the
spiritual nature of Christ’s kingdom, and the proper means to be used in
its propagation and government. To do so, however, would unnecessarily
prolong our statement. Some of the sermons and addresses referred to
were delivered in the presence of the Queen and Prime Minister, as well
as all the most influential people in the island, and the pastors of our
churches ; and as most of them have been printed, those who did not hear
them have read them, and we believe have been considerably influenced
bythem. In addition to special efforts, our regular teaching and preaching
afford constant opportunity of giving instruction on these matters, and the
opportunity is not lost sight of. We have also several little books, tracts,
and pamphlets, containing clear and pointed utterances on the same and
kindred subjects, which are carefully read by the people; some of them
are used as text-books in our classes for pastors and preachers. We may
also say that some of our most intelligent native pastors and preachers
speak as plainly and pointedly as the missionaries on some of these
subjects, and thus shew that they fully understand and appreciate our
views. . We believe that the only thing necessary to secure the triumph of
“74 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

free-church principles in Madagascar, in addition to time and patience, is
quietly and constantly to teach them as they are taught in the discourses
of our Lord and in the writings of His Apostles. There is no people in the
world who has more reverence for the Word of God, and who is more ready
to acknowledge its authority in matters of practice as well as of faith,
than the Malagasy. If we can give them chapter and verse on any matter
in dispute, the question is settled at once. With a people like this, and
on matters so clearly taught in the Bible, we need not despair, even
though many circumstances are against us.

4.—We need hardly say, therefore, that it is our constant aim to secure
the permanent freedom and true spiritual prosperity of the Church of
Christ in Madagascar. We have shewn that it has been our aim in the
past, and it will be no less our aim in the future. The principles which
were dear to our forefathers, and are dear to our fellow-countrymen in
England, are also dear to us ; and we believe them to be as good and as
healthy for the churches in Madagascar as for the churches in our native
land. Knowing something of the necessary evils of state-establishments
of religion, we hope to do our best to save the churches in Madagascar
from any such evils. By teaching and by preaching, by public and by
private instruction, by advice and by warning, and by every other means
in our power, we will do our utmost to save the churches in this land from
the entanglements and fetters of the world, and to build them up in that
liberty wherewith Christ would make them free. If it should happen,
which God forbid, that the churches here are doomed to wear the fetters
which the churches of Christ have worn in so many other parts of the
world, we assure the Directors and friends of our Society that it will not
be through the intentional mistakes of their missionaries.

5.—We are happy to be able to say that we believe the Queen and
Prime Minister to be at one with us in regard to the fundamental principles
of church government, and increasingly anxious to avoid any thing that
may have the appearance of departure from them; and that notwith-
standing drawbacks, the prospects of the churches of Christ in Madagas-
car being allowed to grow in the liberty of Christian life were never
brighter than they are at present. We do not make this statement at
random, or without what we believe to be sufficient evidence. In the
past we have often had cause for anxiety and fear, but at the present
time we have more ground for hope and encouragement than we ever
had before. The Queen and Prime Minister have repeatedly told us that
_ they have no wish to control the churches, or to associate them with the
Government, and so far as their own individual actions are concerned
we have had little cause for fear; but the actions and evident wishes of
many of those by whom they are surrounded have frequently been such
as to produce serious misgivings. At present, however, there is very
little of this kind of thing, and every one seems satisfied to leave the
churches alone. A few weeks ago we had a long interview with the
Prime Minister, and a most free and serious talk on the questions
which at that very time were agitating the minds of the Directors and
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. ' 75

our friends in England. We expressed our views very freely to each
other, and succeeded in understanding each other better than we had
ever done before. He assured us of his attachment to the London
Missionary Society, and to the principles on which the affairs of that Society
had ever been conducted. He also assured us that neither he nor the
Queen had changed in their wish not to control the churches, but that
they desired them to be conducted according to our teaching, which they
believe to be the teaching of the Word of God. He wished us to be
perfectly open and plain with him should difficulties ever arise, or should
he do anything which seemed to us contrary to the teaching of the Scrip-
tures. The interview was a most pleasant and satisfactory one, and we
came away having more faith in His Excellency than ever. It is impos-
sible for us to doubt his sincerity. Consequently, whilst the minds of
our friends in England are anxious and disturbed, the minds of the
missionaries were never more at rest.

The above was written two years ago, but there is not a
word which we regret having penned, or a single position
from which we could wish to withdraw. The principles,
position, and practice of the missionaries, with regard to the
matters specially referred to, are the same now as then. The
churches are as free of state patronage and control as
they were two years ago. The Queen and Prime Minister
are as disinclined to interfere with the government of the
churches as ever they were, whilst they are not the less
zealous in the discharge of their duties as Christians, and
in their efforts to spread the Gospel among the people. We
are happy to say that there has not only been no retrogres-
sion, but we believe there has been decided progress. The
churches are growing in their knowledge and appreciation
of free-church principles, and are becoming more confirmed
in their practice of them. The Government too has recently
taken a more decided stand than ever on the side of
these principles, and also in favour of the Congregational
mode of worship. Were we writing our Statement now, we
should speak more decidedly of the freedom of the churches,
and far more hopefully with regard to the final triumph of
free-church principles in Madagascar than we did two years
ago. Looking back on the past few years in the light of our
present position, we have much cause to thank God and take
courage. We may also say that the free and full discussion
of the questions raised by the correspondence in the English
newspapers has done much good, not only in England by
76 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

allaying the fears of our friends with regard to our principles
and our Mission, but also in Madagascar by settling a much
vexed question, and producing greater unity of opinion
among the missionaries than has existed for many years past.

6.—INTRIGUES OF THE JESUIT PRIESTS.—During the last
few years, the Jesuits have been making strenuous efforts
to extend and strengthen their mission in Madagascar, es-
pecially in the central provinces of Imerina and Betsileo.
The means made use of, however, have not always been of a
straightforward and honourable kind, otherwise we should
have no ground of complaint. Both in Antananarivo and in
the country towns, the priests have, by bribery and other
unfair means, endeavoured to extend their influence and to
injure our work, and in many instances not without success.
In the majority of cases, however, the success of their efforts
has shewn itself, not so much in direct gain to themselves, as
in loss and trouble to us, but with this they seem, for
the present,.satisfied. For some years they have been
giving great trouble at one of our mission stations in the
west. In one of his reports, the missionary in charge of that
station says :—

The Jesuits have troubled us a good deal during the year. Settled here
at our centre of operations, they are striving very hard to extend their
influence in every direction. All the disaffected and troublesome individuals
of course go to them, and endless disputes and divisions arise in the
churches in consequence. No adherents that were any credit to us have
gone over to them, although I know for a fact that they bribe very freely.
The good and well-affected stay with us, the chaff is blown about by
every puff of wind, and some finds its way into their garner. We can
spare them the chaff. It is not so much the people they draw away from
us, as the endless bickerings and divisions they cause, which is so bad for
the churches and so much hinders the work.

In a more recent report by the same missionary we find
the following paragraph :—

The Jesuits have a strong mission at Ambohibeloma, where they have
built a large chapel which is to have a substantial tiled roof. There are at
present four priests there, and although they seem to make very little head
way with the people and have but a small congregation and few scholars,
they are evidently confident that if they only bide their time the future will
be more propitious than the present. This large chapel capable of seating
600 or 700 people they have built themselves, not asking the people to pay
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 77

a penny towards the expenses. Their teacher’s wages they also pay
themselves, making no pecuniary demands upon their converts, which is a
strong recommendation in the eyes of the Malagasy. They give us a
good deal of trouble in various parts of the district, not so much by their
success in doing work, as by the success of their plans for preventing
work from being done by us. They stop at nothing, and having money
at their disposal, and no set principles to prevent them, they bribe most
liberally.

In one of the large villages to the east of the Capital, the
success of their efforts has been of a more disastrous charac-
ter. Two large congregations with their schools have been
nearly exterminated by them. The priests appear to have
bought the influence of some of the chief men in the village,
and these men, whilst remaining in our churches, have been
doing all in their power to hinder our work and to draw the
people away to the Jesuits. Great harm has been done by
these underhand proceedings, but at present there seems to
be a slight reaction in our favour. In other places also
similar means have been adopted with greater or less suc-
cess. The most general plan adopted by the priests is to
draw away the scholars in our schools by small bribes, mis-
representions of their own influence and of the word of the
Queen, and promises of protection against the teachers and
local officers who wish to compel them to attend school.
This kind of thing has great influence with the senior scholars,
who are anxious to get away from school, but who, according
to the Queen’s word, ought to continue to learn. The priests
are also constantly on the look out for the weak places in our
Mission, and any dissension or temporary difficulty arising
in our country churches is immediately laid hold of by them,
and made a means of enticing away the people. One of the
missionaries, writing of such proceedings, says :—

When a division takes place in a church, rival and unfriendly mission-
aries—priests—pounce down like hungry vultures upon the divided church,
and sometimes succeed in widening the breach, and carrying away their
living prey to form the nucleus of a new and antagonistic congregation.
This is not unfrequently the result, especially when the leader of the
ecclesiastical ‘‘split’’ (too often a man of bad character) happens to be a
village magnate, who mentally perceives the shining of the dollars, of
which he has already had a foretaste, and which are to be the reward of his
success in drawing away some of the people to set up a different form of
worship.
73 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

Our schools, and some of our congregations, in Imerina,
have suffered much from these intrigues of the priests, but
those in the Betsileo province have, during the last few years,
suffered much more extensively. The following report of
their proceedings, by one of the Betsileo missionaries, will
shew the nature of their aggressive efforts in that province :—

In the year 1870, or in the beginning of 1871, the Jesuits opened their
mission in Betsileo, and a priest was stationed in Fianarantsoa. At first
their services were held in the house of a native, but after a short time
they built a small chapel to the north of the market-place, where most
of their mission buildings are now situated. Very few of the people
attached themselves to the priest, or attended his services, at that time.
In 1872, or early in 1873, their mission was strengthened and extended,
and they opened new stations at Ambohimandroso, Alakamisy, and Ifan-
jakana. Atthe close of 1873, there were in Betsileo three priests, one
laybrother, and two sisters. From the commencement of their mission
until 1874, they appear to have carried on their work quietly, endeavour-
ing to be on ftiendly terms with the missionaries of the L. M. S. But
from reports which reached the missionaries through the natives, it was
found to be only an appearance of friendship, which was being used
to further their own cause. In 1874, they were in difficulties with the
local government about some land they had taken at Alakamisy for
building purposes, and from this time difficulty after difficulty arose about
one thing or another. One of their first aggressive acts towards our
mission was made at the end of 1873, or in 1874, when a priest entered by
force into one of our country churches, and claimed it as his own. The
people on that occasion fled, and hid themselves in the copse wood by
which their village was surrounded. Shortly after this act of violence,
the priests began to complain of being persecuted, and made a great
outcry to that effect. At the same time, they were doing all they could
to intimidate our teachers and pastors by threats and other means,
while the governor and officers were kept in check by representations of
the stupendous effect an appeal to the French consul would have. The
efforts of the priests, however, failed to produce the hoped for result of
weakening the Protestant Mission. Pastors and teachers were undaunted,
and the local authorities would not be startled, so that 1875 and 1876
passed without very much change. Another plan was, however, being
carried out, which had great effect, owing to the constitution of our
schools, in retarding the work of education all over the country. Priests
were actively canvassing the people everywhere, endeavouring by false
representations and gifts to make converts of them. The names of
young and old were taken and written down by the priests, either as
scholars, or attendants at their places of worship. The inducements
held out to the people were, that they would no longer be required to
send their children regularly to school, and that they would be free from
the government service of having to supply rice and clothing to the

TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 79°

scholars set apart by government. In this way many names were
obtained, but no increase of importance was made to their ‘churches or
schools. In 1877, a number of preachers belonging to the Protestant
Mission, all of them Betsileo, were sent to the Capital to preach before
the Queen and court. They were received with great kindness by the
Prime Minister and others, and were dismissed with many presents. On
the return of these men to Betsileo, they were naturally looked upon as
being to some extent leaders in our educational and other work. They
were in truth the best educated and most intelligent of the Betsileo.
Against these men, probably from the notice taken of them, the Jesuits
soon evinced feelings far from friendly, and they were from time to time
falsely accused of interfering with the work of the Jesuit Mission. As
already stated, it was about this time that a new second governor entered
upon his duties. A change in the attitude of many of the officials towards
the Roman Catholics soon became evident, and at the same time these
officials did not fail to shew their jealousy and enmity towards the
Betsileo preachers already mentioned, but more especially to the prin-
cipal pastor in the town churches in Fianarantsoa. The preachers
were threatened while in the proper discharge of their duties, and
were more or less intimidated. At this time, men were regularly
employed to entice or bribe the scholars in our schools to go over to
the Catholics, and it was in trying to check this that the most serious
difficulties arose. In 1878 and 1879, difficulties began in the town and
in several of the neighbouring villages. Threats and acts of violence
towards the scholars in the Protestant schools became common. Scholars
were waylaid and severely beaten while passing on the highway in front of
the premises of the Catholic Mission; the priests, it was said, having
supplied their teachers and followers with sticks. Pastors were threatened,
Protestant teachers were taken, bound, and confined on the premises of
the Jesuit Mission by the priests, churches were forcibly entered, and
a reign of terror prevailed all over southern Betsileo. The priests were
successful in getting their false accusations listened to in the Capital, and
.all that could be found of the Betsileo teachers who had been honoured by
the Queen were put in chains. All that the Jesuits had desired seemed
to have been accomplished, the Protestant Mission was in real danger,
and they did not fail to shew their satisfaction at this state of things. They
were still active in demanding the imprisonment of others, when an order
to set the men at liberty was received from the central Government, which
had by this time come to learn the nature of the accusations against the
preachers. Notwithstanding this, many, fearing like evils to those which
they had seen befal the best of their companions, either joined the Roman
Catholics, or held aloof from the Protestant Mission.

All through 1879, and into 1880, the evil results of these unfortunate
days lingered, and did much to hinder the progress of mission work. The
tactics of the Jesuits are still the same. Bribes to scholars and teachers
are yet given. Teachers are even now falsely accused, and denunciations
with representations as to the terrible power of the French continue to
80 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

disturb the stillness of the government house. Lately they have been
erecting chapels in all directions, and it is evident that some new move is
planned. The Jesuit Mission in Betsileo has also been strengthened, and
at present contains g priests, 6 laybrothers, 4 sisters, between 20 and 30
chapels, and about 1200 scholars.

7.—DEPUTATION FROM THE SOCIETY OF FRIENDS.—The
last important event, to which we have to refer in this part
of our Review, is the visit of Mr. Isaac Sharp and Mr. Langley
Kitching, Deputation from the London Yearly Meeting of
the Society of Friends. The mission of these two Friends
extended not only to Madagascar, but also to Africa, Austra-
lia, New Zealand, and other parts of the world. After
spending about a year and a half in Africa, they arrived in
Madagascar in June, 1879. After visiting and exhorting the
churches at Tamatave, they proceeded on their way to Anta-
nanarivo, where they met a hearty welcome, both from the
members of the Friends’ Foreign Mission Association and the
missionaries of the London Missionary Society. Mr. Langley
Kitching, the second member of the Deputation, returned
to England after being here about six months, but the visit
of Mr. Isaac Sharp extended over twelve months. During
his stay in the island, Mr. Sharp made frequent journeys
into different parts of the country, on one occasion travelling
as far as Ihosy, one of the chief towns in the Ibara country,
which lies south of the Betsileo province. Mr. Sharp appears
to have been greatly pleased by what he saw and heard on
this journey, and often spoke of it with interest after his return
to the Capital. He seems to have formed a most favourable
opinion of the Ibara people, should Ihosy ultimately become
a mission station. In addition to his journeys in the country,
Mr. Sharp visited most of the churches, schools, and higher
educational institutions in the Capital, giving an address
or appropriate exhortation on each occasion. He also gave
several addresses at our United Monthly Prayer Meeting,
and on two occasions he had the opportunity of addressing
the large representative assembly at the meetings of our
Congregational Union. His wise counsels and matured
advice were much appreciated by the natives, and, we feel
sure, must have left a most favourable impression on their
minds. Such occasional visits by the representatives of
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 81

Christian churches in England cannot fail to be pro-
ductive of much good. They are useful in many ways.
They are useful to the churches in England by whom
the Deputations are sent, in increasing their missionary
information and enlarging their Christian sympathies. They
are useful directly and indirectly to the native churches to
whom the Deputations bring messages of love and kindly
greeting—directly by means of the addresses and exhorta-
tions that are given to them on various subjects, and
indirectly by assuring them of the undiminished interest
in their welfare on the part of their Christian brethren
and sisters beyond the seas. They are also useful to the
missionaries in reminding them of the continued sympathy
and prayers of the churches in their native land, in affording
them new opportunities of Christian intercourse, and in
strengthening their hands in their dealings with the native
churches and the people under their charge.

CHAPTER III.

THE EXTENSION OF THE MISSION.
—3$- 96-4

P to the year 1870, the work of the London Mission-
ary Society in Madagascar was confined to the
central province of Imerina, and almost exclusively to
Antananarivo and the surrounding neighbourhood. This
was not so much the result of choice as of necessity. At
that time there were political difficulties, which effectually
prevented the missionaries from settling in any of the more
distant provinces, and even occasional visits were for a time
objected to by the Government. In addition to this, the
Mission was comparatively weak, and the English mission-
aries were too few to enable them to extend their labours
much beyond the central parts of Imerina, But this arrange-
82 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

ment, though necessitated by the force of circumstances,
was the best and wisest in the interests of the Mission
that could possibly have been made. Experience has taught
us that it would have been a mistake to spread our limited
strength over a wider area, before the Mission was firmly
established in the Capital, and the people there fairly indoc-
trinated into what was to most of them a new religion.
At the present time we are reaping the benefits of the
concentrated labours of the missionaries from 1862 to 1870.
These labours, however, though concentrated, were not,
even then, without effect on some of the more remote
provinces. Long previous to the year 1870, churches had
been formed in Fianarantsoa, Ambatondrazaka, Mojanga,
and many other places, which had never been visited by the
English missionary. Most of these churches were formed by
native Christians from Imerina, many of them pupils of the
missionaries, who had settled in these distant places, some
in the service of the Government and others for purposes
of trade. These natives, when leaving their homes in
Imerina, took their Bibles with them, and became, in their
own simple way, preachers of the Gospel, thus gathering
the people about them, and in course of time build-
ing a chapel and forming a Christian church. Thus the
Word of God spread through the country far and wide, and
the missionaries in the Capital were frequently visited by
people from great distances, who came asking for Bibles and
educational books for churches and schools whose existence
they had never before heard of. After the accession of the
present Queen, all difficulties in the way of European settle-
ments in other towns and provinces, besides Antananarivo
and Imerina, were removed, and the District Committee and
the Directors began to take into serious consideration the
extension of the Mission to other centres of influence. In the
meantime, two visits were paid to Fianarantsoa and other
places in the Betsileo province, the first by the Revs. R. Toy
and C. Jukes, and the second by Mr. Jukes alone. The Rev.
J. Pearse also visited the Sihanaka country. It was not till
1870, however, that the Mission was definitely extended by
the establishment of mission stations beyond the limits of
Antananarivo, The first move that was made in this direc-
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. _ 83

tion was the settlement at Ambohimanga, the ancient capital
of Imerina, of the Rev. J. Sibree, who took up his residence
there on the 26th of July, 1870. In the same year the Betsileo
Mission was begun by the Rev. J. Richardson, who was
stationed at Fianarantsoa. The Antsihanaka Mission was
begun in 1875, when the Rev. J. Pearse settled at Ambaton-
drazaka. The Iboina Mission was begun in 1877, when the
Rev. W. C. Pickersgill removed to Mojanga. The Imerina
Mission has also been extended and strengthened at various
times, by the arrival of new missionaries, and the establish-
ment of mission stations in different parts of the province.
Several stations on the East Coast have also been recently
occupied by native evangelists. A brief history of each of
these new and distant missions, and of the extension of the
mission in Imerina, is given in the following pages.

1.—THE BETSILEO MISSION.—The period under review
embraces the history of this Mission from the first arrival and
settlement of L. M. S. missionaries in the province. Previous
to the year 1870, the Betsileo people, and the Hova stationed
amongst them, had not enjoyed the advantage of any regular
and systematic religious instruction. On one or two occasions
the few churches that were in existence had been visited by
missioharies, prominent amongst whom was the Rev. C.
Jukes, who paid them two visits and spent some time amongst
them in 1868 and 1869, on the former occasion being accom-
panied by the Rev. R. Toy. The masses of the Betsileo
people were at that time entirely untouched by any Christian
influence, and were living in a state of great moral degradation
and ignorance. The few people of whom the churches
were composed were nearly all Hova soldiers stationed in
some of the chief towns. In the month of August, 1870, the
first missionary appointed by the Directors for Betsileo, the
Rev. J. Richardson, took up his residence at Fianarantsoa,
and at once took charge of the three churches in the town, as
well as the country churches connected with them; he also
began educational work amongst the young. Shortly after his
settlement, he, along with Mr. Louis Street of the F. F.M. A.,
who was then on a visit to Fianarantsoa, made a tour through
Betsileo, extending their journey as far as the Tanala. The
84 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

stay of Mr. Richardson in Betsileo was not extended beyond
two years, as in August, 1872, he entered upon work in Imeri-
na. In the meantime, the Mission had been strengthened by
the arrival of the Rev. W. Attwell and Mr. G. A. Shaw, the
latter sent out for educational work, and, fortunately, just at
the time when Mr. Richardson left. The Mission was further
strengthened by the settlement of the Rev. T. Brockway
in Fianarantsoa in July, 1872. The missionaries were now
‘in a position to organise their work, and the country round
Fianarantsoa was divided, for missionary purposes, into three
districts. Mr. Brockway took charge of two of them, viz., the
one to the south and that to the north-west, which correspond-
ed with the tribal divisions of the Iarindrano and Isandra;
and Mr. Attwell took the oversight of the remaining division,
situated to the east, namely, the Ilalangina. To facilitate the
carrying on of the work of the Mission a District Committee
was formed, which held its first meeting, July 23rd, 1872.
Towards the close of this year, a Normal School for teachers
was begun by Mr. Shaw, and the school which previously
existed in the town was divided into two elementary ones.
The following year (1873) is memorable owing to the visit
of the Queen and her large retinue. In the autumn of
that year the Mission was also visited by the Deputation
of the Directors, consisting of the Rev. Dr. Mullens and
the Rev. J. Pillans, who were accompanied by the Rev.
W. E. Cousins and Mr. J. Cameron from Imerina. During
the visit of the Deputation, arrangements were made for _
extending the Betsileo Mission. Atthis time also an addition
was made to the mission staff by the arrival of Dr. G. W.
Parker, who, as medical missionary, opened up a new field
of usefulness amongst the people. In order to extend the
Mission to the north, Mr. Brockway was asked to take
charge of the northern part of the province, and to take up
his residence at Ambositra. At the close of this year, the
number of missionaries was again increased by the arrival.
of the Revs. J. Riordan and T. Rogers, the former of whom
took up his residence at Ambohimandroso, thus extending
the Mission southward, almost to the borders of the Ibara
country. In the following year, Mr. Rogers removed from
Fianarantsga to Ambositra, but after remaining there a short
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 85

time he returned to Imerina; and Mr. Attwell, whose health
had been failing for some time, found it necessary to return
to England. It thus happened that during the greater part
of the year 1874, Fianarantsoa was without any resident
-ordained missionary. In December of that year, the Rev.
W. D. Cowan was sent as an addition to the Mission, and
at once undertook the sole charge of the churches in Fiana-
rantsoa and its districts. Early in 1875, the health of Mrs.
Riordan having failed, owing to the excessive heat of Am-
_ bohimandroso, Mr. Riordan returned to Fianarantsoa, where
he continued chiefly to reside during the remainder of his
stay in the country, Ambohimandroso being nominally his
station. In 1875, Dr. Parker, having accepted an offer
from the Malagasy Government, resigned his connection
with the London Missionary Society, and Mr. Cowan took
charge of the medical and dispensary work in addition to
his other duties. In September, 1875, the Mission was
strengthened by the arrival of the Rev. C. T. Price, who
had been appointed by the Directors to Ifanjakana, thus
making an extension of the Mission to the north-west.
Circumstances did not permit of Mr. Price taking up his
residence at once at Ifanjakana, as had been expected, and
it was not until 1877 that he finally removed to that station.
In the meantime, however, he had taken charge of the Isandra
district, and had also given valuable assistance in the work of
the Normal School. The only retrograde step taken, during
the whole ten years, was the withdrawal of the L. M. S. from
the church at Ifenoarivo and the district of the Manandriana,*
which was towards the close of 1877, or the beginning of
1878. In the middle of 1878, Messrs. Riordan and Shaw
returned to England, the former in ill-health and the latter
on furlough. At this emergency the Imerina District
Committee gave up one of their missionaries, and the Rev.
R. Baron readily volunteered to take part in the work in
Betsileo, at least for two years.

In 1876, the Betsileo Home Missionary Society was founded,
which at first held its meetings every six months, but latterly

* Ifenoarivo and the district of Manandriana are now occupied by the
Norwegian Missionary Society.
86 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

only once a year. Towards the close of 1877, a Young Men’s
Christian Association was formed. In the latter part of 1870,
the Rev. T. Rowlands and Miss Cockin arrived from England
and joined the Mission. The former at once proceeded to Am-
bohimandroso, his appointed station, and the latter, who had
been appointed to the Girls’ School in Fianarantsoa, began
her work. Early in 1874, two college-trained evangelists
were appointed to the Mission: Rarivo to Ambositra and
Rainitantely to Ambohimandroso. The latter died in 1878,
having done a good and lasting work in the south. Another
evangelist, Rainidamary, was appointed to Ambohinamboa-
rina in 1877. Four other evangelists have recently joined
the Mission. In 1879, two teachers were placed among the
Ibara, and in the present year one was stationed among
the Tanala.

In 1870, there were twenty-nine churches south of the
Matsiatra, including the three town churches (Antranobrika,
Ivohidahy, and Ambalavao), the members of which were,
almost without exception, Hova soldiers or traders resident
‘in the province. Many of the members, and even pastors,
were at that time ignorant of the main truths of the Gospel,
and their characters were far from being above reproach.
The pastors were in several instances self-elected, and had
no proper qualifications for the office they had assumed. Of
those who attended church, the majority were influenced
more by the example of the Queen than by any religious
views they held. From the time of the arrival of the mission-
aries, the churches made a steady advance both in town
and country. Towards the end of 1872, when rumours of, the
Queen’s intended visit began to be circulated, there was a
large influx both of Hova and Betsileo into the churches.
The visit of the Queen did much to strengthen the hands of
the missionaries, and gave a certain stability to the churches
under their charge. From 1873 to the present time, the
progress of the churches has been steady. Many of those
who attached themselves to the churches, just before the visit
of the Queen, have fallen away, but many others have joined
them from far higher motives than those did who have left.
The churches of today stand on a far higher and nobler
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 87

platform than did those of ten years ago. There has been
improvement and advance in every respect. Pastors, preach-
ers, deacons, and members are like a new generation.

During the past six years large numbers of Betsileo have
been admitted to the churches, and now they form about
one-third of the whole. In 1870, there were in connection with
the Mission thirteen preachers, all of them Hova, and even
in 1873 there was only one Betsileo preacher. The number
of preachers has steadily increased as the Mission has
been extended. There are now in connection with the town
churches seventy-six preachers, about thirty of whom are
Betsileo, so that the Church is daily becoming more and
more the Church of the people and the province.

The Rev. T. BRockway, who has charge of the Ambosi-
‘tra district in the Betsileo province, writes :—

If one word only were to be used to express the condition of things in the
Betsileo, with which the missionaries are concerned, as compared with that
which existed ten years since, that word must be com¢vast. Those who
knew the Betsileo in 1870, their lack of books, their ignorance in
regard to everything out of and beyond the circumstances in which
they were living, and the general dirty and unpleasant appearance of
not only the Betsileo but of the Hova resident amongst them, must
feel that a work has been done for which we can only give God thanks.
The absence of books and teaching then, as well as the indifferent
character of many who came from the north to settle amongst the Betsileo,
or trade with them, some of whom were (or represented themselves
to be) preachers and teachers, could only be represented as darkness.
Now, although there is much lacking, and much present to retard progress
and cause sorrow, the day has dawned, and is progressing towards a full
light which may precede the perfect day.

Special attention had been given to the education of the young and
instruction of preachers before the visit of the Queen in 1873. That visit
could only be spoken of by the missionary as a boon. The encouragement
given by Her Majesty to education, the respect she shewed the mission-
aries, the rewards given to diligent children, the examination of the native
teachers etc,, together with her reverent regard for the Sabbath during the
whole of her journey and residence, with the regular services on the Lord’s
Day which she attended, and which the families of the missionaries were
encouraged to attend—this was an influence for good, which, it may be,
is still working amongst us.

A great change has come over the district of Ambositra in those years,
not leaving little to be desired, but such a change as gives encouragement
88 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

for hope that could steady earnest work be maintained here for some years
more, the work might be left by the English missionary for less privileged
districts.

The following table shews the changes that have taken
place in the English agency of the Betsileo Mission, and the

length of service of each missionary who has been: connected
with it, since its commencement in 1870 :—

Date of
Date of ;
Name. joining the retirement Station.
Mission. Mission.
. Richardson 1870 1872 Fianarantsoa
. Attwell 1871 1874 Fianarantsoa
G. A. Shaw 1871 1878 Fianarantsoa
T. Brockway 1872 Ambositra
T. Rogers 1873 1874 Ambositra
G. W. Parker 1873 1875 Fianarantsoa
. Riordan 1873 1878 Ambohimandroso
. D. Cowan 1874 Fianarantsoa
C. T. Price 1875 Fanjakana
R. Baron 1878 1880 Fianarantsoa
T. Rowlands 1879 Ambohimandroso
Miss Cockin 1879 Fianarantsoa

The following is the present arrangement of the Mission
staff :—

Rev. T. Brockway, stationed at Ambositra.

Rev. W. D. Cowan ” Fianarantsoa,
Rev. C. T. Price ” Ifanjakana.

Rev. T. Rowlands » Ambohimandroso.
Miss Cockin ” Fianarantsoa.

2.—THE ANTSIHANAKA. MISSION.—The Antsihanaka pro-
vince lies to the north of Imerina. Ambatondrazaka, the
capital, is about six days’ journey from Antananarivo, and is
an important garrison town with a resident Hova governor.
The province is said to cover about 2000 square miles, and is
supposed to contain a population of about 40,000. The
Mission was commenced by the REV. J. PEARSE on his return
from England in the autumn of 1875. A number of congre-
gations had existed in the province previous to that time, and
a native evangelist had been stationed at Ambatondrazaka
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 89

by one of the churches in Antananarivo. The residence of
the evangelist, however, was short, and very little good
appears to have been accomplished. The people are grossly
ignorant and intensely superstitious. Since the settlement
of Mr. Pearse, six trained evangelists have been appointed
to assist him in educational and evangelistic work. There
are also ten native preachers who do their best to edify the
people in the absence of the missionary and the evangelists.
There are at present fifteen congregations in the province,
with 2160 adherents, about 200 of whom are able to read and
possess Bibles or Testaments. There are also eighteen
schools with 1211 scholars, 589 of whom have been taught to
read since the establishment of the Mission in 1875. The
following account of the Antsihanaka Mission has _ been
supplied by Mr. Pearse :—

In the Statistics of the Madagascar Mission for 1870,
which were presented in the Brief Review of the L. M.S.
Mission in Madagascar for 1861—1870, the following
were the statements made relating to Antsihanaka etc. :—
Missionaries: none; Churches: 19; Adherents: 6100. This
gave to the Christian public the most reliable information
which we could obtain from the natives concerning a
very extensive territory, occupying quite one-fourth of the
total area of Madagascar, large parts of which had never
been visited by any missionary. The “etc.” in the above
statement included what is now known as the Iboina
Mission, in charge of .the Rev. W. C. Pickersgill, and
also a large district to the N. and N. E. of Madagascar,
outside the boundaries of the Antsihanaka district; and
where, up to the present time, there are no missionaries,
and in which but a single educated native evangelist is
labouring.

Other information concerning Antsihanaka and the Siha-
naka has, however, been presented to the public; and those
who are acquainted with missionary literature will perhaps call
to mind the encouraging statements of “regeneration and
revival” which have been made. “Thirty-one churches”
have been spoken of as existing in the Antsihanaka district.
“Christianity,” it has been affirmed, “is working among them
with power.” The “strength of their principle and the vita-
lity of the piety” of the Sihanaka, has been declared. “From
small beginnings,” it has been said, “they have grown
go THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.
numerous and strong ;” anda state of prosperity has been
described, which informs the reader, that “their family life
has grown purer ; the great vice of drinking has vastly dimin-
ished ; the soiled clothes are replaced by clean dress ; order,
peace, fellowship, and good will prevail among them.”” Most
pleasing vision! Most encouraging prospect! I would that
it were even so; but alas! for human fallibility. The figure
was carved from a form which the artist thought glowed
with life, but which has been proved to be nothing more than
a painted corpse. The picture was drawn while the landscape
was strewn with artificial flowers, and flooded with borrowed
light. The writers were undoubtedly informed of what they
relate, and their eyes verily beheld many things which they
have described; but their informants were untrustworthy,
and they were witnesses of a fictitious state of things, which
they were led to believe was the normal condition of the
district. “Our visit was expected,” says the late Dr. Mul-
lens in his Twelve months in Madagascar, and that one
short sentence explains the secret of the false impression
which was made upon his mind, and upon the minds of
those who accompanied him, when they made a hurried
visit to this district in 1874. The “visit was expected.”
Truly so; and the conduct of the people was regulated
accordingly, and such arrangements were made in the various
villages the visitors passed through, as would produce
the most favourable impression upon them. It is to
be regretted that those arrangements were too eminently
successful in securing the end for which they were made.
At this time, when the Society asks for a “General Review
of the Jvogress made in the Society’s Mission during the ten
years preceding,” I am somewhat embarrassed by the bright
and glowing colours in which the picture of the Antsihanaka
Mission has thus unwittingly been painted; and unless it is
distinctly borne in mind that a “got up” state of things has
been portrayed, my remarks will seem to indicate serious
retrogression in this Mission, rather than the “progress”
which is desired.

Churches.—The Statistics which accompany this report
shew that we have now fifteen churches in Antsihanaka, and
an average total attendance in them every Sunday of over two
thousand hearers. Although that is only about one-twen-
tieth of the entire population, yet it is pleasing and hopeful
that so many already attend our public services, and that
we can enjoy the privilege of speaking to them of God,
and Christ, and the great salvation. It must not, however,
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. gl

be assumed that the adults who form our congregations are
already intelligent and earnest Christians. The present
ignorance of many of them is appalling; but how could it
be otherwise with men and women who have never enjoyed
any mental, moral, or religious training whatever ?

When the Sabbath day arrives, and the people assemble
in their simple mud or rush churches for public service,
their behaviour is generally becoming, and they listen with
a considerable amount of apparent attention to the reading
‘of the Scriptures and the sermon. Without understanding
it, they give general assent to what is said, and I have
never, either during or after the services, heard them
question or contradict what has been taught, or desire any
explanation of difficulties; nor have I known them offer any
objection (except to the doctrine of the resurrection of the
body), or ask any question to gain fuller information on a
religious subject. They come; they sit quietly; they listen,
as I have said, with apparent attention; but it is evidently
without any sense of personal interest, without feeling, and
without any conviction of the infinite importance of the
Word read, and the truths preached; and when the services
close the people go away utterly indifferent to the truth
and to everything connected with their spiritual welfare.
This utter indifference, and not the active opposition of
the people to the Gospel, is the main element of our
discouragement. Of active opposition there is none in this
Mission field. We are indeed sometimes “perplexed” by
this indifference on the part of the people, but we are “not
in despair.” The Gospel of Christ will surely prove to be
“the power of God” to the salvation of many among them;
and from these, at present, stolid hearers faith sees a band
of faithful Christians and earnest workers arising. The
Word of God, which some two thousand people in Ambaton-
drazaka and the district are constantly hearing, will, in the
Master’s own time, have its quickening effect upon them.
When exposed to active opposition, the great reformer sang

**God’s word, for all their craft and force,
One moment shall not linger ;
But, spite of hell, shall have its course ;
’Tis written by His finger.’’

And, notwithstanding the present unconcern and stolidity
of the Sihanaka, that Word “shall have its course’? among
them, for a greater than Luther has said: “My word,...
shall not return unto me void.”
Q2 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

Twenty-four adults are all who have been baptised by
myself and my native coadjutors since the commencement
of this Mission, in the autumn of 1875. It would not
perhaps have been very difficult to have increased that
number tenfold, if we had employed certain influences; but,
while we should hail with joy and thankfulness an outpour-
ing of the Holy Spirit by which many would be convinced
and converted, we are anxious rather to continue steady,
plodding work, and wait the Master’s own time and way
for results, than to encourage any attempt at “making Christ-
ians.”

Among the baptised to whom I have referred, are three
very promising Sihanaka youths. They attended our school
at Ambatondrazaka, and obtained an elementary education ;
but their disposition was so hopeful, and the promise of
ability which they presented such, that I encouraged them
to go to Antananarivo to seek the advantages of higher
education which are offered there. They are now in the
Normal School being trained for teachers, and when their
term has expired we anticipate that they will return to us,
and occupy positions of honour and usefulness as school-
teachers, or evangelists. Since they went to Antananarivo,
they have been received as members by the church at
Analakely; and, from all that I hear of them, I have
' reason to believe that they are living and acting consistently
with the profession of Christianity which they have publicly
made.

Lvangelists.—In this comparatively uneducated and un-
christianised province of Madagascar, we are enjoying the
benefits of the valuable work being done in the L. M. S.
College at Antananarivo, in educating and training native
evangelists. Five young men who have been educated
in that Institution now occupy stations in Antsihanaka, and
are doing excellent service. Andrianarana is at Ampara-
faravola; Rakotomanga is at Ambohitromby; Rajaofera is
at Tsarahonenana; Rahaingo is at Anosimboahangy ;
and Rainijaofera has recently joined me at Ambaton-
drazaka, having been appointed by the Palace Church to
succeed Rakatro. These young men superintend both the
church and the school at their respective stations, and
much of theirtime is occupied in teaching. In their devotion —
to the work, and the manner in which they discharge their
duties, they give me great satisfaction. I have just returned
from visiting Andrianarana, at Amparafaravola, and was
surprised and thankful to find the efficient state into which
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 93

he has brought his school, and the order and attention of
the congregation in his church. He is doing more, and
exerting a greater influence for good, than could reasonably
have been expected from one whose advantages before be-
coming a student were not great, and who is still only just
entering manhood.

Rahaingo, who has now been at Anosimboahangy. nearly
a year, promises to be a very valuable helper. His station
is three days’ journey north of Ambatondrazaka, and the people
he lives among are perhaps the most heathen in the district.
His work is entirely new, and the name of his station now
for the first time appears in my report. He informs me
that he teaches the school from Monday till Friday, and
conducts public service twice on Sunday; and that the whole
responsibility rests on him, as there is as yet no one in the
place to help him. He has 140 scholars in his school, and a
congregation of 200 on the Sunday. Of his 140 scholars,
only one knew the letters of the alphabet previous to the
year 1875. ‘

Andrianarana, Rakotomanga, and Rajaofera have suffered
severely from the fever for which Antsihanaka bears an
unenviable notoriety ; but neither of them has ever hinted to
mea desire to give up the work, or expressed a wish to
remove to a more healthy part of the island. Rajaofera
was very dangerously ill during my temporary absence in
Antananarivo at the commencement of the year, but I am
thankful that it pleased the Lord to spare him, for he and his
wife are working earnestly and faithfully at Tsarahonenana,
and are bright lights in the midst of a large Sihanaka
population there.

Schools.—From the date of our arrival here, both myself
and Mrs. Pearse have devoted a considerable amount of our
energies to the education of the rising generation, feeling
sure that we should thus most successfully secure the future
welfare of the Sihanaka and the prosperity of the Mission.
We have spent much time in gathering scholars, in organ-
ising the schools, in teaching, and in superintending and
examining the work of those among the natives whom we
have been able to use as elementary teachers. There
are now eighteen schools in connection with the Antsi-
hanaka Mission, and an aggregate of 1211 scholars on our
books. This is one of the positive results of five years mission-
ary work, for previous to our arrival here the education of
the children may be said to have been entirely neglected.
94 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

The actual state of things was referred to by mein my report
for 1877-1878, when I stated, that, “although a few children
were gathered together previous to our arrival, yet they
learned hardly anything from day to day ; and the time of the
scholars, and that of the professed teachers too, was spent in
playing at keeping school.”

In the case of nearly all the scholars now in our schools,
not the slightest foundation had previously been laid, and
we had therefore to commence with teaching the letters of
the alphabet, and we have spent many an hour in drilling
our scholars in what, to them, have been the profound
mysteries of the variety of alphabetical forms between a@ and
2. These have long been mastered by a large number of the
children, and they have advanced step by step, till now we are
able to state that a considerable number can read more or less
fluently in the Bible, or from any other book in their language
which may be put into their hands. From commencing at the
first stages, similar progress has also been made in writing
and arithmetic, and other branches of education; and, within
the past twelve months, forty-nine have been allowed to
leave the schools, having reached the highest standard we
have as yet raised, and who, before they were dismissed,
passed an examination, occupying four days, in reading,
writing, spelling, grammar, geography, general Scripture
knowledge, and arithmetic as high as simple fractions.

Through the scholars in our schools a steady but almost
unobserved work of education is extending among the people,
for in their homes and villages they are the teachers of not
a few, who, from their advanced age and various other
reasons, would never enter our schools or come under regular
instruction. This was happily illustrated the other day at
Manakambahiny, a village where as yet we have no school,
but where I had to pass the night on my way home from an
itinerating tour. Early in the morning, a tall young man
came into the hut in which I had taken up my temporary
abode. Seeing a well-used Bible ijn his hand, it was not
long before I said to him: “Can you read?’ His immediate
reply was “Yes.” Having, however, been taught by expe-
rience that it is not always safe to place absolute confidence
in the simple statement of a native, I put the young man to
the test; and I had the pleasure of finding that his “yes”
was true, for he read to me, with but little hesitation, a
passage trom the Gospel of Matthew, and another from the
Psalms, which I selected for him. In reply to my enquiries
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 95

as to where he had been taught, and who had been his
- teacher, he informed me that he had never attended any
school, but that he was indebted to a youth (now dead), who
was a scholar in our school at Ambatondrazaka, for his
ability to read.

The not inconsiderable quantity of school materials which -
we have sold here is one reliable evidence of the progress
of education, for the people are not willing to spend their
money for what they consider useless, and from which they
can obtain no profit. During the five years of our residence
here we have sold 390 Bibles; 860 New Testaments; goo
Lukes ; 1089 Hymn-books; 1284 Catechisms; 550 Arithme-
tics ; 178 Grammars; 260 Geographies ; 5600 Lesson-books ;
and 1920 Slates. A considerable number of other publica-
tions, issued by the two mission presses in Antananarivo,
have also been sold by us. The sale of our monthly
magazine, Zeny Soa, has for some time past been 150
per month.

An important and useful work has been successfully carried
on by Mrs. Pearse, in teaching needlework to the girls and
women ; and many who were ignorant as to how to hold the
needle, or on which finger to wear the thimble, are now able
to sew and make useful garments. Others can knit jackets,
stockings, and socks ; and some can produce creditable speci-
mens of embroidery, crochet, and various fancy work in cotton
and wool. A solid work has also been accomplished by
Mrs. Pearse among a class of about thirty women. Com-
mencing, at first, by learning the letters of the alphabet,
they’ made gradual progress, till now they can all read in
their Testaments, and write. The benefit they have received
was forcibly expressed by one of them, who said to me
a few days ago: “If you had not come here, we should
have been lost; we should have remained as ignorant as the
beasts.”

Closing remarks.—I am glad to have been able to point to
some progress, and am thankful that, by God’s blessing,
some solid good has been done among the Sihanaka during
the five years of our residence among them; but every
successive year deepens and intensifies my conviction that we
must have “long patience’ ere we can expect to put in the
sickle and reap a large spiritual harvest here. A period of
sowing and watering—of teaching and preaching—must
precede that of fruit gathering. ‘The leaven must work before
the bread can be made.” Our pupils are so ignorant; their
96 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

minds are so dull; their superstitions and immoralities are
so customary and familiar; their moral sensibilities are so
blunted ; their hearts are so hard; in constitution they are
so intensely conservative ; they have so much to wzlearn, as
well as to commence the alphabet of all moral training and
religious knowledge, that their reformation cannot be expect-
ed to take place in a.brief year or two. “Minutes elapse
before the dawn of day; days elapse between the opening:
bud and the full-blown flower ; months elapse between spring’s
blade and autumn’s golden corn; years elapse between feeble
infancy and stalwart man.’”’ We must be content to make
quiet, steady progress, remembering that as a rule it is thus
that all God’s work proceeds. In the words of the author
just quoted: “It is star by star that the hosts of night march
out; it is minute by minute that morn’s great dawn brightens
up into perfect day; it is ring by ring that the oak grows
into the monarch of the forest; it is inch by inch, and foot by
foot, that the tide which bears navies on its bosom comes
creeping in on the shore.”

Our confidence of the future success of this Mission is
unshaken. The “little one shall become a thousand,” and
herein we are sometimes joyful with hope. The oft-told tale
of God’s great love; the frequent reading of the Bible; the
constant repetition of the story of the Cross of Christ; the
uninterrupted preaching of the Gospel, will yet bear much
precious fruit among the Sihanaka, to the glory of Him who
loves them, and to the praise of the Saviour who died to
redeem them. And, therefore, in the presence of much
continued ignorance and superstition, darkness and sin, I can
adopt the assurance of Carey, who, writing from India in the
early days of his missionary career, said: “I have God; and
His Word is sure. Though the superstitions of the Hindus
were a million times more deeply rooted, and the example
of Europeans a million times worse than they are; though
I were deserted by all, and persecuted by all, yet my
hope, fixed on that sure Word, will rise superior to all
obstructions, and triumph over all trials. God’s cause
will triumph, and I shall come out of all trials as gold
purified in the fire.’’*

* An account of the medical work carried on by Mr. Pearse will be
found in Chapter VIII., and some remarks on the superstitions of the
Sihanaka will be found at pp. 37 and 38.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 07

_3.—THE Isomva Mission.—The province of Iboina covers
a large extent of territory on the north-west coast of Mada-
gascar, its chief town being the port of Mojanga, which, on
account of its commodious harbour and its fine river commu-
nication with immense tracts of fertile land, will probably play
a conspicuous part in the future history of the island. As
defined by the Hova authorities, Iboina lies between Baly,
a semi-Arab settlement about ninety miles above Cape St.
Andrew, to the Bay of Majamba in the north, and has its
inland boundaries near the lowest rapids of the three great
rivers Ikopa, Majamba, and Betsiboka. But to the Sakalava
aborigines, Iboina includes all the country which the tribe
has occupied to the east and north; and, as a mission
district, now takes in several Hova garrison towns on the
peninsula south of Pasindava Bay. In all there are eighteen
stations in connection with the Iboina Mission, several
of them centres of considerable population. Most of the
churches were established, previous to the appointment ofa
missionary superintendent, by Imerina soldiers and settlers,
who are still, with a very few exceptions, the only commu-
nicants; but the congregations include Hova, Sakalava,
Betsimisaraka, and African Makoa. The REv. W. C.
PICKERSGILL took charge of the district in 1877, and has
his residence at Mojanga. The occupation of Mojanga as
a mission station had been under the consideration of the
Directors and the Imerina District Committee for a consid-
erable time. Its importance as the principal town in the
_Iboina province, from which the Sakalava tribe could be
easily reached, was seen and acknowledged by all. Dr.
Mullens and Mr. Pillans, the Deputation from the Directors,
when they passed through Mojanga on their way home in
1874, formed a most favourable opinion of the place as a
suitable centre for missionary operations. After a somewhat
lengthy correspondence on the subject between the Directors
and the Imerina Committee, definite arrangements were made
at the beginning of 1877 for the commencement of the new
mission. Mr. Pickersgill was requested by the Directors
to give up his work in Imerina and to proceed to Mojanga,
and the District Committee heartily concurred in the arrange-
ment, though sorry for what appeared to them to be an
98 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

inopportune weakening of the Central Mission. The history
of the Iboina Mission during the last three years, and the
good which has already been accomplished, shew that a
wise step was taken when it was decided to place a mission-
ary in that part of the island. Mr. Pickersgill, writing on
this subject in his last report, says :—

There is still sufficient reason for us to be glad that the Iboina district
was no longer left without direct missionary oversight, however impolitic
we may consider the transference of interest by which we gave it a mission-
ary. But the amount of travelling entailed by the visitation of a few
churches and congregations dotted far apart on an area of some 2000
square miles, is often not a little suggestive of picking up the fragments
before full justice has been done to the well-spread table —which represents,
of course, the more populous districts of central Madagascar.

Iboina, however, is a much more important province politically than the
comparative fewness of its inhabitants would lead us to imagine, and its
future is rich in possibilities of a flourishing kingdom. If ever the Hova
power awakes enough to see clearly that it can only possess the land by
using it, and only become a nation worthy of the far-stretching territory
which it claims by steady colonisation and the mingling of tribes, then
Iboina will be the great highway of the island’s commerce, and one of the
people’s richest granaries ; and we who sow the seed of the Kingdom shall
doubtless have much reason to rejoice that the living Word was in the
field before many of the inevitable tares.

In Mojanga and other large towns in Iboina, the population
is of a somewhat mixed character. In addition to the
Sakalava aborigines, and the resident representatives of
the Hova Government, there are the Arab and Hindi settlers
by whom the faith of Islam is represented, forming an
additional element antagonistic to Christianity. There are
also large numbers of Mozambiques, or imported Africans,
who, till the zoth of June, 1877, were held in slavery, but are
now free. Of these Mr. Pickersgill writes :-—

Next to the Sakalava aborigines, the imported Africans are the most
important feature in the Iboina province and missionary district. In the
two largest towns of Mojanga and Marovoay they quite outnumber
the other divisions of the population. Their emancipation, which
was effected in 1877, raised them to the rank of ordinary Malagasy
subjects. Many of them are regular in their attendance at Divine
worship, and a few are attentive listeners to the truths they hear, espe-
cially those of them who were formerly slaves of the Imerina colonists.
These Africans are known in the interior of Madagascar as Masomdtka,
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 99

but they prefer to be called Makoa—a tribal name of theirs on the dark
continent. The delight of their lives is Zomz¢om. But the Makoa children
are now receiving the advantage of a compulsory education in all the
garrison towns, and there is some little probability of many of them
discovering before long a more rational pastime than that of drumming
and howling from sunset until dawn with interludes of rum and debau-
chery.

One special object of the labours of the Iboina missionary
is to introduce the Gospel to the Sakalava tribe, and to
induce their children to attend the schools, and his efforts
in this direction have not been without success. In some
of the congregations, Sakalava are to be found among the
regular hearers of the Word, and in some of the schools also
a few Sakalava children are being taught in company
with the Makoa and the children of the Hova residents. In
Mojanga, there is aseparate school for the Sakalava children,
which appears to be making most satisfactory progress.
The success of the missionary, however, in winning over
these heathen aborigines has hitherto been very limited.
The fact that Christianity is the religion of the Hova by
whom they were conquered and are held in subjection has,
probably, had an influence in causing them to stand aloof
from the “praying,” and many of them still cling to their
idolatrous superstitions. At Mojanga, there still exist the
relics of an ancient king, which are carefully guarded and held
in superstitious reverence, and which are a bond of union
among the Iboina tribes. Mr. Pickersgill thus describes the
honour paid to these royal relics :—

Every Friday there is a gathering of those who still hope for the blessing
of the royal relics. Asa rule only women and children assemble, led by .
one or two crafty men who act as priests of the religion. The worship on
these occasions includes little more, and nothing better, than singing and
clapping of hands, accompanied by the drubbing of a rowdy drum and the
fitful blowing of a vile-sounding horn. At the first appearance of the new
moon there is an extra Monday performance, which is generally better
attended by the male Sakalava; and once a year comes the big festival
when all Iboina is supposed to be present. Then the great fetish peram-
bulates the village on the shoulders of four believers in this faith once
delivered to them that sit in darkness, and a Sakalava orator stands up to
speak in the name of the mouldered king. The last delivery of the oracle
was mainly as follows: ‘‘Be not disturbed in your minds, for the land and
the kingdom are at peace. And Ihave given up the sovereignty to my
100 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

grandchild—I have given it to Queen Ranavalona. And be it known
to you also that I am a living person like yourselves; therefore I will make
request of the deity, and you for your part must ask of me.’’

There is a living descendant of the worshipped ancestor who is nomi-
nally a Christian, and if the Sakalava were in the habit of being loyal to
the living would likewise be tributary queen of Iboina. She has not yet
been received into the Church, but wishes to become a disciple of Christ,
it is said, on condition that she may be allowed to keep some slight hold
on the other mediator as well. Her husband has already been admitted
into membership, and consistently stays behind outside the forbidden
house when his duty to his wife’s superior rank makes it incumbent upon
him to escort her there. Her visits, it ought to be added, are few and far
between, partly perhaps because Trabonjy, her place of residence, is at
least three days’ journey from Mojanga. Notwithstanding the good lady’s
reluctance to sever herself completely from the faith of her tribe, she pays
sufficient deference to the wishes of her sovereign to be interested in the
work of education.

Most of the churches in Iboina are in garrison towns, and
have been formed by the governor and his military staff, who
are the principal members and officers of the church. In
some instances the governor himself is the recognised pastor.
It is not surprising, therefore, that the spiritual nature of
Christ’s kingdom is often entirely lost sight of, and the
government of the churches regarded as a matter which rests
solely on the secular authority. This has been the source of
much evil in many of the churches, and shews the necessity
for European superintendence. Repeated efforts are made
by the missionary to remedy the evils thus arising in the
. churches, and to bring about a more Scriptural state of things;
and we are pleased to notice that these efforts are heartily
supported by the most intelligent of the native Christians.
Writing of the difficulties which have arisen in the churches
from the above causes, and of what has been done to remove
them, Mr. Pickersgill says :—

These fruitful sources of perplexity and danger exist in every mission
district throughout the country, but the trouble arising from authority’s
professed discipleship is perhaps greater in Iboina than anywhere else.
Every town has its little viceroy, whose voice is law in all the minor details
of government, and who, if he be a man of only a little more than average
force of character, may rule his petty dominion with all the despotism of
the royal supremacy in his arm, unchecked by many of the subtle restraints
which that central power is compelled to acknowledge. In several instances
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. - tor

the Iboina churches were founded by these governors, and fostered by
their satellites, both without knowledge, and for very much the same
reason which led one of the latter, and a preacher of the Gospel to boot,
whilst flourishing an ill-at-ease sabre before a crooked file of soldiery, to
call upon all assembled to salute Ranavalomanjaka as ‘Queen of heaven
and earth.’”’ In two places the governors had been installed as pastors,
and everywhere they were among the most prominent in the Christian
community and in professed devotion to its faith. The religious freedom
of these churches may more easily be imagined than described, for surely
it never had any existence. They were for the most part just ignorant
travesties of Christian fellowship, and even now, with one or two excep-
tions, perhaps, are very little better. Improvement must necessarily be
slow where the lack of knowledge is so lamentable.

A short time ago, an attempt was made to elicit some acknowledgment
of these difficulties from the people themselves—for it is vain to strive for
the liberation of those who are not galled by the yoke,—and also to lead
them to agree upon some common course of action for the removal of the
more immediate hindrances to their progress. A meeting of representa-
tives of eleven of the churches was held at Mojanga. From two to five
delegates came from each place, many of them travelling as many days’
journey in order to be present. The pastor and leading members at Mo-
janga entered into the scheme with much heartiness, and prepared a
hospitable welcome for their visitors. It did not require much argument
on the part of those who led the discussions to convince all present that
something ought to be done to keep the Church of Christ from being a mere
lean-to of the Government ; and there was an equally ready acceptance of
the proposition that a vigorous endeavour should be made to enlighten the
darkness of those who profess to have come out of it—namely the church
members. A number of resolutions were then passed unanimously, with
the happy satisfaction which usually characterises such proceedings, and
the meeting wound up with a feast and a holiday display of the Mojanga
school, which had just undergone its yearly examination. Probably the
resolutions will not be worth much in twelve months’ time, when the next
meeting will‘take place, but at any rate the seeds of a sound public
opinion have been sown, and that is half the battle in any reformation.
Soon after the delegates had returned to their various homes, the writer
made a thorough visitation of the district, and more than once on his
travels was very much pleased to notice signs of a livelier interest in
religious affairs, and also evidences of a kindlier feeling towards the
missionary.

Educational work has occupied a great deal of the Iboina
missionary’s attention, and, with the aid of the Government
and the local authorities, most encouraging results have
been realised in this department, as is evidenced by the
following extracts from Mr. Pickersgill’s last report :—
102 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

For more than a year after the district was first taken under our care the
schools were only provided with such teaching as could be supplied by
untrained young men already on the spot. Several of these were scribes
to the local government, but very illiterate, and most of them too full of
busy idleness to.attend regularly to their work. Now, however, there are
three well-qualified teachers from Imerina settled in Iboina, two of them
supported by the Palace Church in Antananarivo, and the third, so far as
half his salary is concerned, by the people themselves. At Mojanga and
a neighbouring large town, the former teachers still continue their work as
assistants, and are paid by native contributions.

As a result of the manifest improvement in the children belonging to the
principal schools, the other towns are beginning to ask for better instruc-
tion, and three of them, away on the borderland west of the Betsiboka,
have agreed to discard their inefficient teachers, and accept youths from
the first class in the school at Mojanga as substitutes. It has been
arranged that these youths go out in turn two months at a time, and what-
ever remuneration they receive will be provided by those amongst whom
they labour. An evangelist—a fine, energetic fellow,—who in his former
condition as a slave was once well-known as Dr. Mullens’s “black
chaplain,’’ has command of these embryo teachers, and attends to the
religious instruction of the children as well as of the parents.

The following figures discover abundant evidence that the educational
branch of the missionary’s work in Iboinais not an unproductive one.

a Pe . .

og | a fw | 8 uy 1-8 ae | SE) 2s

eo |ee|]s @ 3 ele Els £ | a Sone]

$2)/eg}/ 25 | 88 188) 88 | & ao

eo | fa) 28 | ef (ee | os) oe) ge

o8 | a Av [ae las | ag ae | an
1877 291 79 15 4 ° ce) (e)
1878 | 914 643 | 197 96 a 33 | 24 | 197
_ 1879 | 1800 | 1189 351 |. 239 117 54 41 248

Considerable attention has also been given by Mr. Pickers-
gill to the medical department, but to this subject special
reference is made in Chapter VIII., on Medical Work.

4.—THE IMERINA MIssIon.—The Review of the Madagas-
car Mission from 1861 ¢o 1870 shews that the number of the
male agents of the London Missionary Society in connection
with the Madagascar Mission at the close of 1870 was seven-
teen. Two of these, however, were appointed to Fianarantsoa
in Betsileo, leaving fifteen as the Imerina staff. Of these
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 103

again, two were in England (and did not return to Madagas-
car till 1873), so that the number of L. M. S. missionaries
actually resident in Imerina at that time was ¢hzrteen. Of
these, ten were ordained missionaries having charge of
churches and districts (five of whom, however, had recently
arrived from England and had not entered on their work), and
the remaining three were a builder, a schoolmaster, and a
printer. This was the numerical strength of the Imerina
Mission at the beginning of the decade now under review.
Since then many changes have taken place, and much has
been done to extend and strengthen this Central Mission.
Since 1870, ten new missionaries from England, and one
missionary from Betsileo, have joined the Imerina staff; but
on the other hand, two have died, three have left Madagas-
car, and two have been removed to form new missions in
other parts of the island, leaving zzmefeen* as the present
staff of male agents having appointments in connection
with the Imerina Mission. Sixteen of these missionaries
are married; and in addition to these, Miss Bliss was
sent out in 1876 to take charge of the Girls’ Central School.
Of the.ten new missionaries who have joined this Mission
since 1870, two left England in 1871, four in 1872, and
four in 1873. Since then no additions have been made
to the staff of English missionaries. But in order to estimate
correctly the actual strength which has been available for the
work of the Mission, it must be remembered that there has
not been a year within the last decade when one or more of
the missionaries have not been absent on sick-leave, ‘or
furlough. On the other hand, it will be well to bear in mind
that the missionaries of the Friends’ Foreign Mission Asso-
ciation have been working in friendly co-operation with
those of the London Missionary Society during the whole
of the time under consideration.

The accompanying table is an approximately true index
of the avazlable strength of the Imerina Mission, as it shews

* This includes the Rev. W. E. Cousins, who is employed and supported
by the British and Foreign Bible Society ; the Rev. R. Baron, who during
the last two years has been connected with the Betsileo Mission; and
Mr. Pool, who expects to leave Madagascar in a few weeks.
104 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION,

the number of English missionaries, male and female,
vessdent in the province at the close of each year from 1870 :—

Agents of the F. F. M. A.
Date. Agents of the L. M. S. in friendly co-operation
with the L. M. S.

Male. Female. Male. Female.
1870 13 14 2 2
1871 14 13 3 t
1872 17 7 4
1873 22 19 5 Z
1874 22 19
1875 21 19 6 7
1876 22 21 5 6
1877 19 18 4 5
1878 19 18 4 4
1879 15 13 4 4
1880 14 II 4 4

This gives an average of eighteen male and about sixteen
female agents of the L. M. S. for each year included in
the above table, and an average of about three male and
a little over five female agents of the F. F. M.A.* It will
also be noticed that the number of male agents of the
L. M. S., actually resident in the island, is only ome more in
1880 than at the close of 1870, whilst the female agents are
three less than they were ten years ago. This is partly
to be accounted for by the comparatively large number of
those who are absent on furlough, in some cases rendered
necessary by ill-health.

Having thus ascertained the actual strength of the Mission,
it now remains to be seen how this strength has been applied.
It will be well to remember at the outset, that the Imerina
District Committee has, through the whole of the ten years,
had to provide for the superintendence of more than 800
congregations, containing over 60,000 communicants and
about 200,000 native adherents, and also for about 650
elementary schools. It has also had to maintain the College

* In addition to these, the Medical Mission at Analakely, supported b
Dr. Burns Thompson and his friends, was, until abandoned in 1876,
worked in harmony with the L. M. S.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 105

with an average of about seventy students, a large Normal
and General School for Boys, a Central School “for Girls, the
Palace School, and the Mission Press with the constant
demands for periodical literature and educational books. In
addition to this, it has had to give up one of its members for
the work of Bible Revision, to supply its quota of delegates
on the Revision Committee, and to provide for all the special
business and numerous contingencies that have from time to
time arisen in the Mission. At the close of 1870, there were
eleven missionary districts in the province of Imerina, includ-
ing the then newly formed districts of Ambohimanga and
Vonizongo, and each of these was under the care of an English
missionary. In 1872, the Isoavina district was formed from
the eastern portion of that of Andohalo, thus making twelve
separate districts in the Imerina Mission, nine of which were
superintended from the Capital, each having one of the city
churches as its station or motherchurch, This arrangement
continued in operation until the redistribution of districts in
1874, which was made in consultation with the Deputation.
It thus happened that for the first three years (1871—1874)
nearly all the Imerina missionaries were resident in the
Capital, three only having charge of country stations. It
was never intended, however, that so many of the mission-
aries should remain in Antananarivo, and the Imerina
Committee only waited for instructions from the Directors
before arranging for the establishment of new stations in
several of the country districts. A plan of the proposed
arrangements had been sent to the Directors, but their
sanction was withheld until the visit of the Deputa-
tion. During this visit, it was arranged that five new
country stations should be formed, in addition to those of
Ambohimanga, Vonizongo, and Isoavina, each station to
have a large district attached toit. One of these was to
be at Ambohibeloma in the west, and to be in the charge
of the Rev. J. Peill and the Rev. W. C. Pickersgill; another
was to be at Ambohidratrimo in the north-west, and in
the charge of the Rev. R. Baron; a third was to be at
Itsiafahy in the south, and in the charge of the Rev. T.
G. Beveridge (this was afterwards placed under the care
of the Rev. J. A Houlder); a fourth was to be at Amba-
106 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

tomanga, or some other town in the east, and in the charge
of the Rev. T. Rogers, who had. not been able to remain
in Betsileo and had joined the Imerina Mission; and the
fifth was to be at Ambohibemasoandro in the north, but for
which no appointment was made. All these arrangements
ultimately received the formal approval of the Directors, and
grants of money were made, as required, to enable the District
Committe to carry them into effect. Of these five proposed
new mission stations, the first two only have been completed.
Mr. Baron occupied the station in the north-west for a
short time previous to his visit to England in 1875, but
soon after his return to Madagascar in 1877 it. was found
desirable to provide him with another sphere of labour.
Mr. Rogers resided for a few weeks in the eastern district,
but, on account of ill-health, he was obliged to return to the
Capital, and afterwards to go to England; and it has not
been deemed expedient to make another appointment to
that district. After further consideration, it was decided to
abandon the proposal to form a mission station at Ambo-
hibemasoandro, especially as no missionary was ever found
to take charge of it. .The two stations of Ambohibeloma .
and Itsiafahy have been more fortunate and successful, and
have been provided. with good mission houses and other
necessary buildings, though even these have been attended
with difficulties and disappointment. In 1877, Mr. Pickergill,
one of the two missionaries appointed to the charge of Ambo-
hibeloma and its large district, was removed to begin the new
Mission at Mojanga, to the great sorrow of the people among
whom he had laboured ; and latterly the ill-health of Mr. Peill
has made it necessary for him to leave the district, and the
District Committee has invited him to undertake work at the
College. At Itsiafahy there have been difficulties of a peculiar
kind, arising from the want of harmony between the mission-
aries and the native evangelist who was stationed there by
the Palace Church, These difficulties, however, have happily
been removed, but Mr. Houlder, the missionary in charge,
is now residing in Antananarivo, and has the temporary over-
sight of the church at Ambohipotsy. So that of the five new
mission stations arranged for during the visit of the Deputa-
tion, not one is at present occupied by an English missionary.

‘
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 107

A short time after the departure of the Deputation, but
with their approval, the large district of Vonizongo was
divided into two, with a second mission station at Fiarenana,
which was placed under the care of the Rev. E. H. Stribling.
The province of Imerina thus became divided into seventeen
missionary districts (not reckoning that of Ambohibemaso-
andro, for which no provision was ever made), and fora short
time each of these districts had an English missionary in
charge.* After a while, however, it became necessary, for the
reasons given above, to reunite the districts of Ambatomanga
and Ambohidratrimo to the city churches of Ankadibevava
and Amparibe, with which they had formerly been asso-
ciated; and thus, at present, there are practically only fifteen
separate districts in the Imerina Mission. These districts
with the missionaries in charge are as follows :—

Ambatonakanga inchargeofthe Rev. C. F. Moss.

Amparibe and \ os Rev. W. E. Cousins.
Ambohidratrimo ”
Analakely ” Rev. G., Cousins.
Ambohipotsy ” Rev. W. Montgomery.t
Tsiafahy oy Rev. J. A. Houlder.
Ankadibevava and \ ” Rev. C. Jukes.
Ambatomanga ”
Ambohitantely : ” The Friends.
Ampamarinana ” Rev. B. Briggs.
Ambohibeloma ” vacant 1
Andohalo ” Rev. H. W. Grainge.
Isoavina » Rev. P. G. Peake.t
Faravohitra no ‘ vacant
Ambohimanga » Rev. J. Wills.t
East Vonizongo. ” Rev. T. T. Matthews.t
West Vonizongo ” Rev. E. H. Stribling.

It should also be mentioned that since the commencement
of the Church in the Palace, the Queen and the other members

* In this enumeration of districts we have included that of. Ambohi-
tantely, which is under the care of the missionaries of the F. F. M. A.
This district has also been subdivided for the convenience of superinten-
dence.

{ In England.
108 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

of that church have aided materially in the evangelistic
and educational work in Imerina, by supporting a large
number of evangelists and school-teachers. These are stationed
in the chief towns of the province, working in harmony
with the missionaries, and, to a great extent, under their
guidance.

In addition to church work in town and country, it has
been necessary from time to time to make special arrange-
ments for the efficient maintenance of the enlarged educa-
tional institutions in Antananarivo, and for the increasing
work of the Mission in other departments. The rapid
increase in the number of schools, and the advancing
importance of elementary education as a branch of mission
work, made it necessary to set apart two missionaries as
superintendents of education, for the systematic inspection
of the schools and the conducting of periodical examinations
_ throughout the various districts. The College, the Normal
School, the Girls’ Central School, the Mission Press, and
Bible Revision, have also required the undivided attention
of the missionaries in charge; and frequent sickness, and
absence on furlough, on the part of some of these, have made
it necessary for others to share their work. The following
are the present arrangements for the conduct of these several
institutions and special departments of mission work :-—

; Rev. G. Cousins and

The College in the charge of Rev. J. Peill

The Normal School » Rev. J. Richardson.*

The Girls’ Central School » Miss Bliss.

The Mission Press ” Mr. J. Parrett.

Bible Revision » Rev. W. E. Cousins.

Superintendence of Schools ” Mr. J. C. Thorne and
Mr. T. Lord.

In reference to these appointments it is necessary to
observe (1) That the Rev. R. Toy shared with the Rev. G.
Cousins the duties and responsibilities of the College from
its establishment in 1869 till the middle of last year (1879),
when a severe illness laid him aside from all work and made

* In England,
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 109

his return to England absolutely necessary—we are sorry
to have to add that he died at sea on his way home, and
on this account Mr. Peill has been recently asked to take
his place. (2) That during Mr. Richardson’s absence in
England on furlough, Mr. Thorne has, at the request of the
Imerina Committee, taken charge of the Normal School, and
Mr. Lord has also been asked to take charge of the
Palace School, no other arrangement being practicable; the
superintendence of elementary education has thus been sadly
interfered with. (3) That whilst the Rev. W. E. Cousins,
as Principal Reviser, is the only one wholly set apart for
the work of Bible Revision, yet there are also three L. M.S.
delegates on the Revision Committee, who find much of their
time taken. up by the work. Mr. Cousins, on the other hand,
gives what time he can spare from his special work to the
superintendence of the Amparibe and Ambohidratrimo dis-
trict. (4) It should also be noticed that some of the mission-
aries are holding double appointments, or superintending
two or more districts. Such arrangements, however, can
only be regarded as temporary, and are expected to cease
as soon as those who are absent on furlough return to the -
island, or new missionaries are sent out from England. Some
rearrangements may be made at the next meeting of the
Imerina District Committee, as Mr. Baron, who has recently
returned from Betsileo, is now without an appointment.

The Imerina Mission has also been strengthened by the
appointment, at different times, of more than fifty educated
native evangelists, who are stationed in the central towns
and villages throughout the various districts. These evan-
gelists are a great help to the missionaries, and by means
of such help the evangelistic and educational work of the
Mission has been far more extensive and thorough during the
last five years than ever it was before. Each of these evan-.
gelists has care of from five to twelve churches and schools,
and carries on his work under the direction of the missionary
in charge of the district ; his work is also subject to periodical
examinations, which act as a stimulus to success. The appoint-
ment of these evangelists however, has tended to increase
the work of the missionaries. The schools are more numerous
110 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

and farther advanced than they were before the evangelists
were appointed, and they require a great deal of attention.
The details of church life are more fully reported to the
missionary than formerly, and his advice more frequently
sought with regard to them. Besides this, the work of
the evangelists has both tobe arranged and constantly
superintended by the missionary. The experience of the last
few years has taught.us that there are very few of these
teachers who can be safely left in the charge of churches,
without the aid and supervision of the missionary in nearly
all the details of their work. Thus, whilst the work of the
Mission is being done more thoroughly by means of these
trained evangelists, the necessity for European supervision
has been considerably increased.

We have now given a general outline of the circumstances
of the Imerina Mission, and of the changes that have taken
place in its conduct since 1870. A more detailed account
of the various districts, the educational institutions in An-
tananarivo, and of the church and school work as carried
on by the individual missionaries and their assistants,
both in town and country, will be found in the following
chapters.

5.—-DISTANT STATIONS OCCUPIED BY NATIVE EVANGEL-
ISTS.—Besides providing for the spiritual wants of the people
in Imerina, and doing their best to carry on the work of the
Mission in its extended form, the missionaries, with the aid
of the native churches, have been putting forth efforts to
evangelise the distant parts of the island by means of native
agency. A Native Missionary Society has been organised
for this purpose, and several native teachers are now
being supported by it. In some instances, evangelists
are sent out and supported by individual missionaries,
assisted by friends in England; and in other cases also
the District Committee has made arrangements with native
‘churches at a distance by which trained teachers may be
stationed among ‘them, each bearing a suitable portion of
the expenses. So that by various means the influence of
the Mission is extended and the kingdom of the Saviour
advanced. ,
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. ELE

' The most important station hitherto occupied by a native
evangelist is that of Tamatave, on the east coast. Tamatave
is the chief port in the island, and contains a large though
mixed population. The town has been greatly extended and
its population largely increased during the last few years.
It is the residence of the British Consul, and of most of the
European traders. Various missionary societies are also
represented there. The Roman Catholics, the S. P. G., and the
L. M. S., have each their places of worship with day-schools
attached. The two former societies are represented by
European missionaries, but we regret to say that there is,
as yet, no resident English missionary in connection with
the London Missionary Society. It has long been the wish
of the missionaries in Madagascar that one of their number
should be stationed at Tamatave, and the Directors have
agreed to this, but the man to occupy the position has not
yet been found. There are two churches in the town in
association with our Society, the oldest of which was
formed in 1861, and the other in 1869 or 1870. These. two.
churches contain 160 communicants, and the average at-
tendance in the two congregations is about 500. One of these
churches has recently erected, at great cost, a new substantial
place of worship of wood, and the two congregations have
united in the erection of a new school-room of the same
material. There are also 23 outstations in connection with
the churches at Tamatave, though some of them are without
teachers. In 1875, a college-trained evangelist was stationed
there, the churches undertaking to pay about two-thirds of his
salary. This evangelist has given great satisfaction, and is evi-
dently doing his best to supply the needs of the churches, both at
Tamatave and in the neighbourhood. The following historical
account of the churches at Tamatave, taken from a former
Report of the Madagascar Mission, shew the claims which
these churches have on the London Missionary Society :—

There are few districts in Madagascar which have greater interest to
the missionaries of our Society than that of Tamatave. It was there that
our first missionaries landed in 1818, and commenced missionary work in
the island; and. it was there that five out of the six of the small
missionary band, in their attempts to introduce the Gospel, were cut
down by the fever soon after their arrival, Mr. Jones being the only
,

112 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

survivor. On the removal of Mr. Jones to the Capital in 1820, the
work at Tamatave was suffered to be in abeyance for several years;
but during the time of the persecution many of the Christians made
their way there and so escaped from the country, whilst others were °
constantly residing in the neighbourhood, secretly adhering to the faith
and form of worship taught by their missionaries. Mr. Ellis, on his arrival
in 1853, and 1854, as well as in 1857, found many Christians there in
disguise, and was heartily welcomed by them. Again, in 1862, when
Mr. Ellis returned to Madagascar, followed a month or two later by some
of the present missionaries, they found a church already existing at
Tamatave. It was not, however, a large one, there being between twenty
and thirty members and about a hundred adherents. They met in a house
given by king Radama for the purpose, and occupied by Andrianado, who-
with his family were the principal members and guiding spirits. -

Between the time of the landing of Mr. Ellis and the missionaries who
followed him, the Bishop of Mauritius (Bishop Ryan) paid a visit to the
Capital, with the object of establishing a mission in the island in connec-
tion with the Church of England. In consultation with Mr. Ellis, a mutual
arrangement was made that the L. M. S. should be allowed to remain in
undisturbed possession of Imerina, and that the societies represented by
Bishop Ryan should establish a mission at Tamatave and amongst the
coast tribes. This arrangement was carried out with mutual satisfaction
for some time. We, on our part, gave up the church at Tamatave, and
urged the people to join the S. P. G. Mission, which was commenced at
that place in 1863. Andrianado, the nominal pastor, one of the Christ-
ians who had escaped to Mauritius during the persecution, having offered
his services to the L. M. S., and pressed Mr. Ellis very earnestly for
support, was distinctly told that our Society could not engage him, and
was at the time advised to unite with the S. P. G. Following the
advice therefore of Mr. Ellis he did so, and has been employed in
connection with that mission ever since. The members of the native
church, however, firmly refused to separate themselves from our Society,
and from the form of worship rendered dear to them by a long course of
persecution and suffering, and connect themselves with another mission,
although urged over and over again by Mr. Ellis to do so, and to accept
the arrangement made by him with Bishop Ryan. For years we refused
to recognise them in any way whatever as belonging to our mission. Their
applications for books were rejected, and no concession was made to any
of their frequent remonstrances. They were almost entirely ignored by us, |
and left to act for themselves.

Later on, when some of our missionaries were passing through Tamatave,
they made an occasional visit to the chapel, and sometimes conducted
the service. Little, however, as this amounted to, we were accused by
the episcopalian missionaries of having broken the agreement, while they
were using all their influence with the societies at home to disregard the
arrangement made with Mr. Ellis, and establish a mission in the Capital,
as well as to appoint a bishop to reside there.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 113

In the meantime, a more substantial building had been erected by
the native church at Tamatave, and after the impetus given to the
spread of Christianity soon after the accession of the present Queen,
another chapel was built near the battery, and ever since there have
been two good congregations regularly meeting together for wor-
ship on the Sabbath. In 1874, the clergyman in connection with the
S. P. G. at Tamatave made strenuous efforts to induce the native
Christians to join his Society, and more than once, contrary to their
wishes, attended the chapel in full canonicals, and insisting upon taking
the place of the native pastor, conducted the service according to the
fashion of his own church.

In 1874, the S. P. G. appointed a bishop and staff of clergy to the
Capital, in spite of the most earnest remonstrance of the L. M. S., to
whom under God Madagascar is indebted for the introduction of the
Gospel, and through whose long continued labours heathenism has been
practically overthrown in Imerina. This remonstrance was likewise sup-
ported by the C. M. S., who withdrew their missionaries who were
labouring in the island, rather than give even an apparent sanction
to such a proceeding. The agreement made by Mr. Ellis having therefore
been annulled by this intrusion, we can no longer hesitate in giving that
assistance and oversight to the churches at Tamatave which they so
much need, and which their persistent fidelity to us and our mode of
worship so richly deserves.

During the last few years, several special visits have been made by
missionaries appointed for that purpose by the Committee of the L. M. S.,
and they have invariably left with the full persuasion that our Society will
not be doing its duty to this district until they have stationed at least one
missionary at Tamatave.

Next to Imerina, the most densely populated part of Madagascar is
probably the east coast. Tamatave, which is rapidly increasing year by
year, and has in fact more than doubled its population during the last few
years, ranks next to the Capital in size and importance. North and south
of Tamatave, and extending to some distance inland, there are consider-
able masses of people dwelling in heathen darkness, but few of whom have
ever received religious teaching of any kind whatever. It is true that a
little has been done in some of the principal towns near Tamatave by the
churches of that place, and in some others by Christian traders and
officers from the Capital. Scattered along the east coast there are perhaps
forty or fifty semi-instructed, and, hitherto by us, unrecognised churches,
but which nevertheless claim connection with us and desire our co-operation
and help.

In addition to what the missionaries have been able to do
for the churches at Tamatave and the immediate neighbour-
hood, something has been recently done by the Native Mis-
sionary Society for the coast tribes south and north of
EE4 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

Tamatave. For several years churches have existed in many
of the large towns and villages on the south-east coast, but
most of them of a very ignorant and unsatisfactory character,
there being no competent teachers or pastors among them.
Time after time, these churches have sent to Imerina asking
for lesson-books and begging for teachers. _Two years ago,
four evangelists were sent there by the Native Society, but
one of these died soon after his arrival on the coast, so that
there are now only three. These are far too few for the work
to be done among the numerous tribes in that part of the
island, and we trust the number will be speedily increased.
Two visits have been paid by English missionaries to the
south-east coast within the last five years, one in 1876, and
another in 1879, and the accounts of both visits bear testimony
to the large population that exists there, and the great work
which has yet to be done for Christ among those numerous
heathen tribes. The reports which the native evangelists
give respecting their work, and the readiness of the people
to receive their instructions, are encouraging, and we trust
will induce others to join them.

The Native Society has also stationed an evangelist on
the north-east coast, but from letters received from him it
appears he has many difficulties and some opposition to con-
tend with. Still he is not disheartened, and, by God’s blessing,
he has succeeded in doing some good. Another evangelist
has recently been appointed to Ankavandra, a large town in
the west, on the borders of the Sakalava country. We
rejoice in every movement of this kind, for we feel that it is
chiefly by such means that the heathen tribes of Madagascar
must be brought to Christ.

The REv. C. JUKES gives the following report of special
evangelistic work at Mahanoro and other towns on the east
coast :—

By the generous aid of friends in Scotland, I have been able to under-
take aggressive work in a part of the country where no direct and
continuous missionary effort had before been attempted. I refer to the
dense population of Betsimisaraka in the neighbourhood of Imahanoro,
Vatomandry, and other towns on the east coast, amongst whom I have
recently stationed three energetic evangelists—two of them students
from our College—who are carrying on a hard battle with heathenism,
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 115

immorality, and drunkenness. The work of these men is rendered terribly
difficult on account of the presence of numerous Creole traders, who
have come from Bourbon and Mauritius with barrels of rum, with which
fiery poison, I fear they will, unless God in’ His mercy prevents such
a calamity, ultimately depopulate the part of the island where they are
carrying on their accursed business. The devil’s missionaries appear
to be reaping a greater harvest than the servants of Christ. The rum
barrel has a greater attraction for the masses than the Bible. Yet the
three evangelists are not labouring in vain or spending their strength
for naught. They have twenty-five congregations and several schools
under their charge, and although I am not able to speak in the highest
terms of the Christian character of those who compose these congregations,
I believe the leaven of the Gospel is surely working. I have been specially
fortunate in the men IJ have been able to secure for this new mission, and
I cannot but anticipate for them a Jarge measure of success. No
matter how hard and dry the soil, the living seed, scattered in prayer
and suffused with the grace of the Spirit, cannot die. The Divine Word
must prevail, and the kingdoms of this world become the kingdom of our
God and of His Christ.

CHAPTER IV.

THE NATIVE CHURCHES AND EVANGELISTIC

WORK.

— £9
HE Native Churches in Madagascar, whilst one in faith,
and, with slight modifications, of the same order of
worship, are of four classes, viz., the Palace Church, the City
or town Churches, the Suburban Churches, and the Country
Churches. All these four classes of churches were in existence
in 1870, but the number of the country churches has been
considerably increased since then. Each class has its
peculiarities, not of doctrine, but of character, position, and

influence, and each will demand a special notice.

1.—THE PALACE CHURCH.—Of the native churches, the first
in position and influence, and that which we place first in order,
though of a much later origin than some of the others, is the
Palace Church. We have spoken of this church as if it were
one of a class, though in reality it forms a class by itself.
116 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

It is perfectly unique in character, and in some respects stands
entirely alone. It does not, however, isolate itself from the
other churches and claim to work independently and alone,
but is ever anxious to be considered as one with the rest, and
takes a share in all Christian work for the evangelisation of
the country. This church has been the subject of much
controversy, and some of its actions have been -grossly
misrepresented. It occupied a prominent place in the
correspondence on affairs in Madagascar, which appeared in
the English Independent and other newspapers nearly three
years ago, and to which we have already referred in a former
part of this Review. We were then told, among other
startling things quite new to most of us who are living on the
spot and ought to know all about such matters, that “the
churches in Madagascar are under the jurisdiction of an
oligarchy, called ‘the Church within the Palace.’” In the
Statement of the missionaries, which was drawn up in reply to
such criticisms, this assertion was emphatically denied, and
the history and position of the Palace Church were explained
at considerable length. It was shewn that this church had
a most natural and unostentatious origin; that it has grown
as other churches in the Capital have grown; that the form
of worship, the doctrines preached, and the principles on
which all its ordinary business is conducted, are the same as
in the other churches; that the pastors and preachers of the
other town churches are those who usually officiate in that
church ; that, though occupying a unique position, as being
the Church within the Palace, and that of which the Queen
and Prime Minister and all the most wealthy ‘and influential
Christians in Antananarivo are members, it has never claimed
precedence, or exercised undue authority over the rest; that
it has in a Christian and unassuming manner always shewn
itself ready to assist the poorer and weaker churches; and
that it has co-operated heartily with the Native Missionary
Society in its efforts to send the Gospel to the distant
and heathen tribes. The opinions then expressed by the
missionaries are still entertained by them, and the sub-
sequent history of the Palace Church has tended to confirm
them in these opinions. The action of this Church towards
other churches, whether in town or country, has, we believe
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 117

been dictated by good motives, and nothing has been
done by it, since the Statement of the missionaries was
published, to give rise to suspicion, or to which objection
could reasonably be made. The only thing, at present, in
connection with the Palace Church which is a cause of
anxiety to the missionaries, is the laxity ofits discipline. This
we feel to be a serious evil, rendered all the more so by the
conspicuous position which the church occupies. No mission-
ary has any direct connection with this church, and some of
the native pastors are sadly wanting in moral courage when
cases of serious difficulty arise. It is well known that
there are several in full communion with the church whose
conduct is far below the Christian standard, and yet they are
allowed to retain their position. Cases of misconduct are
too often winked at, and allowed to pass as if unnoticed, and
we are afraid that the native pastor, or pastors, who have the
principal charge of the church, are greatly to blame in this
matter. We believe, that if all cases requiring the exercise
of discipline were properly brought before the notice of the
church, there is sufficient Christian principle among its
members to lead to a right course of action. The importance
of paying greater attention to this matter has recently been
impressed on the pastors and members of the church, and,
we trust, not without good effect.

The greatest event in connection with the Palace Church,
which requires a special notice in this Review, is the opening
of the new Chapel Royal, which took place on the 8th
of April, 1880. This event had long been expected, and was
looked forward to with considerable interest. The foundation
stone was laid on the zoth of July, 1869, so that the building
was more than ten years in course of erection. The form of the
Chapel is parallelogram, intended to accommodate some four
hundred and fifty worshippers, having at its south-west
corner a tower rising to the height of 112 feet, and on its east
side a minister’s vestry from which there is an entrance to
the platform, also a retiring room for the use of the Court,
who, by means of an ornamental bridge (which connects the
building with the high ground on which the royal residence
stands) and staircase, are able to enter the Church through this
private room. A law requires that the Monarch shall sit in
118 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

the highest place at all public assemblies, hence the erection
of a royal pew, on an elevated floor, was imperative. The
base of this pew is of a coarse native marble, panelled and
richly carved; the enclosing panels and canopy are of a
handsome wood, sorhewhat resembling a light rosewood, the
whole, together with a soffit to the canopy, being richly
carved by native workmen. Beneath the trellis work of the
canopy crimson velvet is introduced. The Italian style was
chosen, on account of its harmony with the surrounding
buildings, and great freedom has been used in the work of
ornamentation. The church is built of stone found imme-
diately above, or in the lap of, the primary formation. It is
presumed to be granite, with dull crystals, and earthy matter
filling the space between the crystals, and combining them in
a solid mass. The shafts of the columns inside the church,
the moulded and carved band and frieze, some panelling, the
key stones, also two large panels intended to receive engrav-
ing on the outside of the building, are of a hard dull red
clay, which seems to harden when exposed to the atmosphere.
Care has, however, been taken that this material should
sustain no pressure. The roof is the only one in the country
covered with slates. These were quarried at a distance of
five days’ journey from the Capital. The building is prepared
for the Congregational form of worship, and it also exhibits
some results of the instruction given by the agents of the
London Missionary Society, to whom the natives are indebted
for their knowledge of several useful arts, other than those
connected with building. The stained glass windows were
supplied by Messrs. Canun, of Smethwick ; the ceiling orna-
ments by Messrs. Jackson, of London ; and the organ (a good
instrument with two manuals and two and half octaves of
foot notes), by Messrs. Hill and Sons, London. The building
was planned and its erection superintended by Mr. W. Pool,
of the London Missionary Society.

The day of opening was one long to be remembered in
Madagascar, and, we doubt not, will have much influence in
extending and strengthening the native Church. Careful
preparations were made for the opening services, so that all
things might be done decently and in order, not as business
relating to the Government, but as having exclusive reference
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 119

to the “praying.” Invitations, with admission tickets, were
sent to the missionaries of all the societies represented in
Antananarivo, which invitations were cordially accepted by
the missionaries of the London Missionary Society, the
Friends’ Foreign Mission Association, and the Norwegian
Society ; but the S. P. G. and Roman Catholic missionaries
declined to be present. The time for the morning service
was fixed at ten o’clock. Punctually at that hour the
Queen left her private residence, when a procession was
formed of the representatives of all the chief families in the
Capital, attended by a band of music and the Church choir.
On the way to the Church, the Prime Minister announced, in
the Queen’s name, that the state prisoners, who were
banished at the commencement of the present reign, on
account of the part they took in a conspiracy against the
Government, would have their fetters removed; and that Her
Majesty would also release the prisoners in Antananarivo,
except those who had been imprisoned for debt. A few of the
prisoners at Antsirabe and one at Ambatondrazaka were
also set free. After this, the procession was interrupted
by a cry for mercy on the part of a man, who had committed
murder some seven years ago, and had been in hiding ever
since. He at once obtained a free pardon from the Queen,
and the procession proceeded on its way. Her Majesty
entered the Church at about eleven o’clock, and the building
being at once filled in every available space by a select
company (admission being by ticket), the opening service
was commenced. After the introductory part of the service,
which consisted of the singing of some hymns and anthems
(specially prepared for the occasion), the reading of Scripture,
and prayers, His EXCELLENCY the PRIME MINISTER, at the
request of the members of the Church, gave the following
account of the origin and history of the “Church within the
Palace :’— ;

I have been requested by the members of this Church to give some
account of the origin of the ‘‘praying’’ here in the Palace, and of the
erection of this House of Prayer, which we are this day dedicating to the
worship of God. And though I at first declined, thinking it would be
better for some one else to undertake the duty, yet, being still urged to do

so, I afterwards consented. My heart truly rejoices because, by the bles-
sing of God, the purpose which has been long entertained is now fulfilled,
120 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

and the Queen and all of us are now met together to unite in opening this
House, which has been erected for a House of Prayer to God, and for the
praise of His name through Jesus Christ our Lord. Thanks be to God
who has blessed us, and caused to come to pass this day of joy and glad-
ness. Man proposes, but the accomplishment is of God, and God has
fulfilled to the Queen, and to all of us, our purpose. Blessed, therefore,
be Jehovah, the Lord God Almighty, who is both Lord of all and also
merciful and gracious through Jesus Christ His Son.

And because of this, my heart inclines me, in accordance. with your
request, to put in order a few words, shewing the history of the origin of the
‘praying’ here in the Palace, and the way in which God has inclined the
heart of the Queen to build this House here in the midst of her Palaces for
the worship of God. If we consider what led the Queen to pray, it can be
truly said she was not influenced by man, but that it was God alone who
disposed her heart towards the ‘‘praying.’’ There is one thing, however,
which I think it well you should be made acquainted with.

During the reign of Queen Rasoherina, there was a Bible (this which I
now show to you) which I placed in the house where she dwelt, and which
was regarded as common property, for it was freely handled by every one
who was able to read ; and this Bible was always lying about as a thing
of no importance. On the 3rd of April, 1868, when Queen Ranavalona
came to the throne, this Bible was still there, and was still freely handled
by the people as before. During the days of mourning fur Rasoherina,
the Queen often read in this Bible to pass away the time, and even the
officers about the court and the ‘“‘twelve youths’? (under secretaries in the
Palace) took it up when they were at leisure. And I believe that the
reading of this Bible by the Queen was the means by which God disposed
her heart to pray to Him, and that it did not come from man. On Sunday
morning, the 25th of October, 1868, the Queen, myself, and a few of the
Queen’s personal attendants, met for prayer in the centre room of the
Palace called Mahatsara, and when the service was ended and we came
away, the Queen sent for Rainingory, 16 honours, and Rainibesa, 15
honours, and Rainilambo, 15 honours (senior officers in constant attend-
ance on the Queen), and said to them: “I inform you, my fathers and
mothers, that I shall pray to God; and my reason for doing so is this: I
look to the heavens, and they did not come of themselves, for some one
made them ; and I consider the earth, and it did not come of itself, for
some one made it. It is God who made these things, and therefore I
shall pray to God; and I inform you because you are as my fathers and
mothers.’’? And when they heard that they said: ‘That is good, your
Majesty, and we thank you.’’ But although they said this, their coun-
tenances seemed to shew that they were sorry. And in the evening we met
again for worship, as we had done in the morning. And on the following
Sunday, the 1st of November, 1868, Rainingory, Rainibesa, and Rainilambo
met together with us for worship; and from that time the Sunday
markets were gradually put a stop to.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. | 121

We see from this the power of the Bible, for though the reading of it
had been regarded as a thing of no importance, and done simply to pass
away the time, yet its effect was not lost and it was not read in vain, for it
was as good seed sown which only waited for the proper time to spring up,
and that time was the day on which the Queen met for Christian. worship
for the first time in the Palace, and also this day which is one of great
joy. How great is the power of the Word of God! Let us, therefore, not
think lightly of the reading and of the hearing of that Word, for'it has
indeed power to change the hearts of men, according to that which is
written in Isa. lv. 11, saying :—‘‘My word that goeth forth out of my mouth
shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please,
and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it.’’

On the Wednesday evening, the day previous to the coronation, the
Queen said to me :— “‘I will rest my kingdom upon God, send therefore for
Andriambelo and Ratsilainga and Andrianaivoravelona and Rainimanga
and Rainitavy (pastors of the city churches), that they may ask God’s
blessing on me and my subjects, for God only has made me what I am.”
These five men were accordingly sent for at once, and they read portions
of Scripture and offered prayers that night, and at cock-crowing next
morning they prayed and read the Scriptures again. And when the time
drew near for the ceremonies of the coronation, and the Queen was about
to appear in the presence of her subjects, these pastors were again sent
for that they might join together once more in seeking the Divine blessing |
on the events of the day.

A little before the coronation, I and my friend Mr. James Cameron
talked together saying :—‘‘Let us put some words of Holy Scripture round
the canopy over the Queen’s seat.’’ This was mentioned to Her Majesty,
and she consented, and the words in Luke iii. 14 were agreed upon, viz.,
‘Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men.’’
A Bible was also placed on a table by the side of the Queen. -

After we had held service in the Palace for a short time, the Queen and .
myself asked to be baptised, and after having been taught three months
by Andriambelo and Rainimanga, according to the previous custom of the
churches, we were baptised by Andriambelo in the room where we had
been accustomed to meet for worship, and after four months further
instruction we were received as communicants at the Lord’s Supper. On
the 25th of December, ten months after the baptism of the Queen, Rai-
ningory and Rainibesa and Rainilambo were also baptised.

The number of those who were united with us in Christian fellowship,
from October 25th, 1868, to October 1st, 1870, was twenty-seven, of whom
nine were adults, viz., the Queen and myself, Rainingory and Rainibesa and
Rainilambo, Ralaiarivony and Ranjavao, and Rafaralahy and Ravelondra-
no, the remaining eighteen being young people and their attendants. But
though the communicants were at that time so few, yet we expected that,
by God’s blessing, the number would increase, and the Queen took into
consideration the erection of a Stone House of Prayer within the Palace
122 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

enclosure. She then communicated her intention to the people, and God
fulfilled to her her desire, in that on the 2oth of July, 1869, she was enabled
to commence the erection of this House. The chief motive, however, which
led to the building of this House was the Queen’s desire that her subjects
should know the true God and the Lord Jesus Christ, and that the
‘‘praying” should never depart from her kingdom. *

A little less than two months after this House of Prayer had been
commenced, an event took place which could scarcely have been expected
by any one. On the 8th of September, 1869, the keepers of the idol called
Ikelimalaza came up to the Palace to inform the Queen of their intention
to change horns (hanova tandroka) (an idolatrous ceremony formerly
performed whenever a new sovereign came to the throne). When this
message was given to the Queen, she unexpectedly sent out word, saying :—
“*T will burn all the idols belonging to my ancestors; but as to yours,
that is your business.’’* And according to these words the Queen sent
immediately to all the towns where the idols of her ancestors were kept,
and had all the idols burned.

These two events took place here at that time, viz., the commencement
of this House within the Palace enclosure for the worship of God, and the
burning of the idols of the Queen’s ancestors. And my reason for calling
these great events is that one, viz., the erection of a House of Prayer
within the courtyard of the Palace, was an event which it was intended
should never take place, and the other was the bringing to naught of the
idols which had been trusted in and served, and which it was believed
could never be taken away. And it can be truly said that no one led the
Queen to do these things except the Spirit of God alone. Thanks be to
God for the gift of His Holy Spirit, and for thus disposing the heart of
the Queen, who has given us liberty to pray in peace and in joy as we
do at present.

According to the custom of the ancestors, every sovereign in Mada-
gascar has, at the beginning of his or her reign, either built a new house
within the Palace enclosure, or altered and improved one already in
existence ; but when Queen Ranavalona came to the throne, the words
of Christ in Mat. vi. 33 entered into her heart :—‘‘Seek ye first the
kingdom of God and His righteousness, and all these things shall be
added unto you.”” And this Stone House of Prayer to God is the first
building the Queen has erected within the precincts of the Palace.

From the 21st of February, 1871, to the 6th of July, 1873, thirty-eight
children were baptised, nine adults (poor people) received pecuniary
support from the Church, and Rabodosoa from Ambatonakanga was the

* A mistake has often been made with regard to the idols which on this
occasion were ordered to be destroyed, in speaking of them as xational
zdols. They were not such; but were simply the idols of the Queen’s
ancestors, of whom Her Majesty is the living representative. They were,
therefore, the Queen’s personal property, and she had a perfect right to
order their destruction. Each tribe, or family, had its own idols. With
the people’s idols the Queen did not interfere,
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 123,

first to join us from another church. On the 27th of July, 1873, Ramatoa
Rasoaray also joined us with thirteen others; and from that time until
now many others have associated themselves with the Church in the
Palace, and have been our fellow-workers in spreading the Gospel of
Jesus Christ.

Such then is the history of the Palace Church, and of the erection of
this House of Prayer; and though the members of the Church have not
been many, but comparatively few, yet I think we have ample cause for
thankfulness to God. The money collected by the Church since its
commencement for the extension of the kingdom of God is £6238 115. 6d.
With regard to the work of the evangelists and school-teachers sent
out by the Church, whether those at a distance or those near at
hand, and in respect also to the raising of funds for the support of
teachers sent out immediately after the burning of the idols, the Palace
Church has done what it could, and we sincerely rejoice in the work which
has been accomplished. But even though I should not mention these
things, the fruits that have been realised are, I think, known to all of us.

Taking into consideration the things which have now been mentioned,
it becomes us to join together in giving thanks to God, Oh! that our
thankfulness to God for all He has done for us may be like the joy we feel
in thus setting apart this House of Prayer! Amen. Oh! that God may
ever dwell with us in this House! for the times when God visits us are the
most joyful seasons of our life. Amen.

I have now to inform you, at the request of the Church, of the great
kindness of our friend Mr. W. Pool, shewn in the erection of this House.
He has been indefatigable in his efforts to make it the success which we
now see it to be, and it is proper that we should thank him. (Then look-
ing towards Mr. Pool the Prime Minister said :) We thank you Mr. Pool.
May you live and be blessed of God, for your work in the building of this
House is successful. It is done well, and you have not spared yourself in
the doing of it. ,

I have also to mention the work done by the labourers and the people
generally, for they have worked with joy and with diligence; and though
the Queen has thanked them personally, and‘has given them clothing and
money and food, yet as the House is finished it is well that we should
thank them here in the presence of the multitude. May God prosper
them !

After this address, and in addition to more singing and
prayers, two sermons were preached: the first by Andriam-
belo, the chief pastor of the church, and the second by the
Rev. B. Briggs, missionary of the London Missionary Society.
The service was brought to a close at 2.30 p.m. Another
service commenced at four o’clock, the Queen and Prime
Minister with numerous attendants being present as in the
morning. At this second service two sermons were also
124 THE” MADAGASCAR MISSION.

preached: one by Rainimanga, pastor of the Ambohipotsy
church, and the other by the Rev. W. C. Pickersgill,
missionary of the London Missionary Society. This service
closed at about six o’clock. Mr. Pool presided at the organ
on both occasions, and the singing was excellent. Services
in connection with the opening were held in the Church daily
for a fortnight, during which time all public business was
stopped. The nine town churches with their districts, the
Ambohimanga churches and district, the Ambohimanam-
bola churches, the Isotry church, and the district of
Vonizongo, each having a day in’ turn. Some days the
Church was filled eight times, and a short service of song
and prayer conducted each time. The Queen and Prime
Minister were present at all these services from beginning to
end. Thus for a whole fortnight, Antananarivo was the
scene of a most joyful excitement, caused by the daily visits
of the churches from the country to join in Christian.’ wor-
ship with their beloved Sovereign in her new House of
Prayer. We believe that much good was done by these
services, and that a stimulus was given to the native churches
which will operate for a long time to come. Since the open-—
ing of the Church, most of the missionaries of the London
Missionary Society and the Friends’ Foreign Mission Asso-
ciation have been asked to preach and conduct Sunday
services in the new building. We are also pleased to notice
that on the 29th of April, a special meeting of the members
of this church was held, at which, in addition to deciding on
sending out another evangelist, and the choosing of eight
new deacons and seven deaconesses, it was agreed that the
Church should be open every Wednesday morning for a
meeting for prayer and the teaching of the Scriptures; and
the members present also unanimously agreed to do all in
their power to make the “Church within the Palace” all that
a Christian church ought to be. We trust this purpose was
formed in all sincerity, and that God will help them to carry
it into practice.

2.—THE TOWN CHURCHES.—Next to the Palace Church,
the City or Town Churches occupy a most influential position.
There are nine of these in Antananarivo, three in Fianaran-
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 125

tsoa, and three at Ambohimanga. Most of these churches
are large and important in themselves, apart from the relation
they sustain to the churches in the country. They are the
wealthiest, and also the most advanced in Christian know-
ledge and experience, of any of the churches in the island,
and are all centres of much power and influence. From the
first, they have claimed a large share of the missionary’s
attention, and still continue to do so. Each of the churches in
Antananarivo and Fianarantsoa is the station or mother
church of a large district, and is expected to assist the
missionary in his endeavours to provide for the weak country
churches, which are not yet able to support themselves.
With each of these town churches is also associated a large
number of native preachers, whose duty it is to visit the
country churches within a reasonable distance. These visits
are usually paid in rotation, or according to some definite
plan, so that the village congregations may never be in want
of some one to preach to them when they assemble for worship
on the Sunday. .

Most of the churches in Antananarivo support their
own pastors, assist in supporting their own schools, and
give something towards the maintenance of evangelists in
the country districts. They are also looked to for pecuniary
help in the building of country chapels, and are often
appealed to in cases of difficulty in any of the country
churches. These town churches have made most substantial
progress during the last ten years. There are unmistakable .
signs of growth among them. They have grown in know-
ledge, in experience, and in Christian manliness. There is
a deeper appreciation of the truths of the Gospel, and greater
power in applying them. There is also an improvement in
the outward life and general conduct, and there are fewer
cases requiring the exercise of church discipline than formerly,
Among the younger men there is, perhaps, a premature
development of character, which shews itself in overmuch
self-confidence, in a want of reverence towards their elders,
and in an unwillingness to defer to the opinions of others,
even of those who have had more experience than themselves.
There is, moreover, need for a deeper sense of the evil of sin,
and a higher appreciation of purity of life and conduct. But
126 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

on the whole, there has been a.decided advance, both in the
inner and outer life of our town churches. The pastors of
these churches are all men of character and ability, and
occupy a most influential position, but of these we shall have
more to say by-and-by.

The conduct of the churches in Fianarantsoa, and their
influence on the country churches in association with them,
are thus described by the Rev. W. D. Cowan :—

The town churches have as a matter of course great influence over those
in the country. All difficulties, either as to cases of discipline or other
matters, are generally referred to the town churches for settlement, and all
candidates for membership appear before these churches for examination.
Of late years, more especially during the past three years, changes have
been made as to the selection and appointment of preachers. Young men
desiring to become preachers are put on the list as readers, for a period
of from four to six months. At the end of which time they preach
before the town church. If approved of, they are then added to the
list of preachers. As the numbers of the adherents and members
were greatly increased, it was thought advisable to open preaching
stations in the neighbourhood of Fianarantsoa. In 1878, ten of these
stations were opened, and. were attended with much success. Schools
were formed at these stations shortly afterwards. In order to supply
the country churches, preachers were sent out regularly from the town.
To meet the expenses of preachers visiting country stations, a system of pay-
ments had been introduced by Mr. Richardson soon after his arrival. This
system was further developed by Messrs. Brockway and Attwell. It was
unfortunate, however, that the scale of payments was fixed so high, that
it became a burden afterwards, which pressed heavily in the working of
the churches as they increased in number. The more so, as a custom once
fixed amongst the Malagasy is most difficult to change. On the formation
of the preaching stations, a modification as to the payment of the preachers
was made, each preacher having to supply the churches three Sundays
out of every month bearing his own expenses, on the fourth Sunday
supplying one of the more distant churches and receiving expenses
according to the scale which has been used from the beginning. Thus
the number of services held by the preachers every year far exceeds the
number of those for which an allowance for expenses is made. Service
in the country churches is only held once on the Sunday, when they
have a preacher either from town, or from one of the neighbouring
churches. In Fianarantsoa, services are held morning and afternoon,
which are followed by union prayer meetings, held alternately in the
three churches. There is a morning service every Wednesday, and a
Missionary Prayer Meeting on the Monday morning after the first Sunday
in each month. Meetings for church business are held on the Wednesday
before the first Sunday in each month. The rules as to the admission of
candidates are the same as those in Imerina.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 127

Now and again, special efforts are made in connection with
the town churches with the view of interesting and benefiting
the large number of young people, especially young men,
who are associated with them. Some time ago, a series of
special services was held in Antananarivo for this purpose,
and in most of the churches special classes are conducted
with the same object. <A special effort of this kind has
recently been made in connection with the Ambatonakanga
church, to which the Rev. C. F Moss thus refers :—

A special work has been carried on during the past year among the
young men of the Ambatonakanga (town) congregation. With the object of
being useful to some who were not in the habit of attending the congrega-
tional Bible-class, a Mutual Improvement Society was formed, the
working and results of which have, thus far, been encouraging. Every
Saturday, classes have been held for instruction in Scripture, Moral
Philosophy, the composition of sermons, Elocution etc., varied with
Lectures and Discussions on important subjects, all of which have been
largely attended and carried on with much heartiness and spirit. At the
beginning of the present year the members of the society gave a Sacred
Harmonic Concert before an audience of 1500 people, all of whom appeared
to be intensely interested and delighted. The experiment was very
creditable to the members of the society. At the close of the first session,
examinations were held in the class learning Moral Philosophy. Of the
twenty young men who presented themselves one attained the maximum
number of marks (100), while seven others reached from 97 to go.

The Ambohimanga churches may be fairly classed with
what we term town churches. There are three of these, though
they are all situated: outside the city walls. The Rev. J.
WILLS thus writes of the general progress of Christianity
in this ancient capital :—

As the head quarters of the national idolatry, very strong prejudices
against Christianity, and the missionaries who brought it, would naturally
be expected in Ambohimanga. The power of the Gospel of Christ to
remove all obstacles has however been witnessed here. Opposition has
entirely ceased ; prejudices have melted away before kindness; a goodly
number of people have received the truth in the love of it, and exemplify
its precepts in their spirit and conduct; and a general improvement,
morally and socially, is evident in the population at large. In addition
to the missionary’s influence, that of Andriamifidy, the evangelist
sent out by the Palace Church, has been a great blessing to this place.
He was a man of great prudence, a sincere Christian, and a
conscientious worker, and won the respect and love of the people;
and his departure was felt as a great loss to Ambohimanga, when in
128 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

i879 he was taken by the Government to occupy a position of trust and
importance in connection with the newly organised office for foreign affairs.
He has been for many years a trusted follower and adviser of the Prime
Minister; and the presence of such men in the conduct of public affairs
must be of great advantage to this young kingdom.

Ambohimanga is a position of considerable importance politically and
socially, and it is a matter for rejoicing that the Gospel of Christ has
taken so firm a hold of what was formerly one of the chief strongholds
of superstition and ignorance. Our Sunday services, though not all that
could be wished, are fairly well attended. And on Wednesday morning we
have an early service in the School-room, at which the pastors and many of
the preachers, as well as some of the people, and the elder scholars of
the boys’ and girls’ schools attend very regularly. This hour of prayer
and familiar exposition of the Word of God has been very enjoyable and
edifying ; and is followed by a Bible-class for the preachers and any
other men who like to attend.

3.— THE SUBURBAN CHURCHES. — The chief Suburban
Churches are five in number, though there are several others.
which partake of a suburban character, but are more distant

_from the Capital. These churches are large, some of them
containing five or six hundred communicants, and the usual
Sunday congregations are equal to those in some of the larger
city churches. The character of these congregations, how-
ever, is very different from that of those in the city. They
consist chiefly of poor people and slaves, who mostly inhabit
the suburbs, and prefer to have a place of worship of their
own rather than join with their masters and more wealthy
neighbours in the city churches. This being the class of
people of which these suburban churches consist, very little
help can be expected from them towards evangelistic work
in the country, or for any other purpose. It is as muchas the
people are able to do to support their own place of worship,
and give a little help towards the salary of their school-
teacher. They are, as arule, most hearty in their worship,
and very willing to work, but they have very little money
to give. All these churches have built new places of worship
within the last few years (one or two are still unfinished),
and the people have worked hard and done all in their power
towards the erection of the buildings, but they have needed
considerable help in the purchase of timber and other things
which labour alone could not procure. In matters of govern-
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 129

ment these suburban churches are more independent of the
city churches, with which they are nominally associated, than
are those more distant from the Capital, but they require
more attention on the part of the missionary. It is, however,
a pleasure to visit them, and our only regret is that it is not
possible to do so more frequently because of the claims of the
numerous country churches under our care. The church at
Isotry i is, at present, under the special care of Mr. Parrett,

and is thus fortunate in obtaining a larger share of European
superintendence than is possible in the case of the other
suburban churches, which are in the charge of missionaries
having city churches and large districts to attend to.

4.—THE COUNTRY CHURCHES.—It is in the Country
Churches that the greatest numerical progress is to be found.
The number of town and suburban churches is the same now as
in 1870, but the country churches are much more numerous.
Instead of the 261 native churches of 1870, we have now
between eleven and twelve hundred in connection with the
Madagascar Mission. The number of church members has
also increased from 20,951 to over 70,000, and the adherents
from 231,759 to 244,197. The native pastors and preachers
have also increased in a similar proportion. It is not,
however, in the numerical progress of the Mission that
its real strength lies, but in the amount of Scripture know-
ledge and Christian principle which its numerous churches
represent. In these respects also there has been manifest
progress within the last ten years. The teaching and preach-
ing power of the Mission has been very greatly increased,
and not without the most gratifying results. We by no
means wish to represent the native churches as being in any
respect perfect, or as having attained to that degree of know-
ledge and strength when they may be safely left to their own
resources. There is a great difference among them. Some
of these churches are strong, and, we believe, firmly estab-
lished in “the faith once delivered to the saints ;”’ but the
large majority of them are still weak and disorderly, and
stand in need of constant teaching and superintendence, even
in the minutest details of church life. Still, notwithstanding
all this, we can look back on the work of the last ten years,
130 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

and thank God and take courage. There has been a great
advance, both in the outward conduct of the members
and in the inner life of the churches. Though they have not
yet reached the perfect stature of the man in Christ, they
have grown in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and
Saviour, Jesus Christ. In everything there has been some
advance, but in many things not so much as we could wish,
though in a few things perhaps more than could have been
expected. Some of the churches are a pleasure and a joy to
us, whilst others are a source of much anxiety and constant
disappointment; but in all we have hope, and we trust that,
by the blessing of God, the weak will yet be made strong,
and the crooked and perverse be brought into loving harmony
with the teachings of the Gospel of Christ.

The REv. C. JUKES, writing of the country churches in
the Ankadibevava district, says :—

Of the general character of the churches it is impossible not to speak
with some amount of pleasure, not unmixed, however, with feelings of
grief and disappointment. I can remember when most of my churches
‘were formed, ten or eleven years ago, and often recall the great masses of
untaught and unwashed heathen that crowded into the hastily erected
rush chapels, just as they would assemble to listen to a royal kabary in
the market-place, and probably from the same motive, and contrast them
with the comparatively clean and orderly congregations of to-day. This
remark applies chiefly to the congregations near the Capital, and not to
the distant ones, whose growth has been slow, since necessity has left
them very much to themselves. Amidst much that is deplorable, undoubted
progress has been made. Only a short time back, there were numbers
of congregations containing not a single person who could read; now
there are some in every congregation who can read, and in many
would be found a pretty good number who have a fair acquaintance with
the Word of God.

A marked change has also taken place in the morality of the people.
Eleven years ago there were polygamists in, perhaps, every congregation ;
and men notorious for their immorality would unblushingly stand up in the
pulpit to parade their new profession and display their volubility by pub-
licly offering prayer. This would scarcely be tolerated now, and few would
have the boldness to attempt it. Ideas of moral purity are growing and
are increasingly appreciated. Social and moral questions are beginning
to call into existence that powerful and useful potentate public opinion.
Parents, who formerly would encourage their children in sin and unclean-
ness, are learning to realise their duty to shield their offspring all they can
from evil influence and temptation. I fear that even amongst numbers
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 131

who bear the Christian name there is still much wickedness, and that
many an edifice we fondly imagine is substantial and lasting, rests upon a
foundation of rottenness ; but not a few of those sins which were openly
gloried in, are now concealed or disguised, and bring shame and confusion
of face when discovered.

Of the sAzrztual and religious condition of the churches it behoves one
to speak with caution. That our churches contain real disciples of the
Lord Jesus I cannot for one moment doubt; but that the majority of the
members have a very low conception of the Christian life is equally certain.
The moral sense, long hid and well nigh choked by idolatry and its
concomitant evils, is, as yet, only in its germinal state ; but with the grace
of God in the heart it must develope, and is now, we know, doing so.
Although their notions are somewhat confused and indistinct, the native
Christians hold firmly to the doctrine of justification by faith in Jesus; but
they fail to rise to the ideal of self-abnegation, and personal holiness, by
the indwelling of the Holy Ghost and vital union with the living Saviour.
What has painfully struck me for years past in the Malagasy converts, is
the absence of a deep sense of the ‘‘exceeding sinfulness”’ of all sin, and
an earnest desire to live above the world. They speak about sin against
the Almighty with apparently far less concern than when referring to
grievous offences against the sovereign.

The Rev. E. H. STRIBLING also writes as follows of the
churches in Vonizongo :—

Christian knowledge in some of our churches has made advance since
1870. The agreement to secure better instruction of the members and to
prevent the admission of uninstructed candidates has been, in several of
the churches, practically recognised. Very few church members in West
Vonizongo (except the aged) are unable to read; and the majority have
obtained some general acquaintance with the Word of God; a few also
have advanced to a fourth catechism of Scripture. Many of our aged
members have been taught to repeat the well-known passages from John
iii. 16-20 and Romans viii. 31-39, with some of our best native hymns
(Rock of Ages, etc.).

The Christian life of many of our church members has been consistent,
if we take into account a far too vague apprehension of what that life
demands in regard to self-sacrifice, love, and holiness. Any outward
immorality of members being visited by suspension from church-fellow-
ship, has of course exercised a decided check upon the licentiousness, lying,
and cheating, formerly so prevalent as to be regarded as venial offences.
The general influence too of the house of prayer, as also the presence in

_many churches of at least one or two who endeavour to live the Christian
life, have been gradually influencing the public opinion in favour of Christ-
ianity. A smothered hatred to our holy religion appears however at
various times, as at Fiarenana, consequent upon the expulsion from
132 ‘ THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

church membership of two brothers, for adultery and lying. Such weak-
ening of our churches, however, may be regarded as a step in the right
direction, and in accordance with the apostolic injunction :—‘‘Purge
out therefore the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, as ye are
unleavened.”’

The progress made in the more distant portion of the
Faravohitra district, to the north-east of the Capital and near
to the forest, is thus referred to by the Rev. J. WILLS :—

The general advance in the district has been specially marked among
the churches on the borders of the forest. Ten years ago two men only
could read among the Zafimamy, which is the name of the tribe inhabiting
this part. But as the result of the burning of the idols and the Queen’s
acceptance of Christianity, the people crowded to the churches, and
were baptised by hundreds; and on account of the inadequacy of teachers
properly to instruct the catechumens, the vast majority of those who
became communicants were still grossly ignorant. At one place (Tsara-
honenana), the bread given at the Lord’s supper was secretly thrown
under the mat by some, instead of being eaten, for fear of some unknown
evil being connected with it. At another place (Ankazondandy) after my
first visit in 1872, although I was received with kindness, the people (I
have since been told) trembled as they shook hands with the first European
who had ever entered their village; and after I had left, a bullock was
killed as a propitiatory offering to avert evil consequences. And up to
1877, the ZAfimamy still offered sacrifices at the reputed grave of their
ancestor Andriamamilaza ; and these practices were only then given up
owing to the energetic remonstrances of some Christians from the Capital,
who accompanied me to a united meeting of the churches for the purpose
of placing a school-teacher among them. This I have only learnt very
lately, as I had no idea of what was done at the time.

But great changes have, by God’s blessing, been effected during
the past few years. The number of communicants has become less,
but the knowledge and consistency of those remaining have improved.
A young man from among themselves received two years training
at the College, and returned and laboured most successfully among
them for some years, and is now receiving another term of training with a
view to going as a missionary to some of the distant heathen tribes.
Pastors from among themselves have been chosen to preside over the
churches, and two of them have been sent by the united churches of the
district to the Bezanozano across the forest as teachers. Schools have
been established and supported amongst them; and at the examination
just held (April, 1880), 282 children were present, many of whom passed
very creditably. The earlier scholars are now the teachers in the schools,
and one of them has entered the L. M. S. College; and there is no part
of the country I visit where I am received with greater cordiality or treated
with greater kindness.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 133

The means made use of by the missionaries throughout the
various districts for the further edification of the churches, in
addition to the ordinary services and the regular preaching
of the Word, are the district Bible-classes, and the periodical
meetings for conference by the native pastors, preachers,
teachers, and other members of the churches who choose to
attend. These means have been productive of much good in
the past, and are universally adopted among the churches.
During the last few years special efforts have been made to
teach the adult members of the churches and congregations
to read, and the number of people who are able to read the
Bible for themselves has been very considerably increased, as
will be seen from the tables of statistics which accompany
this Review. The reports which have been sent in by the
missionaries are full of references to these efforts to build up
the churches, but they are much the same in all the districts,
and are far too numerous to be quoted. We, therefore,
confine ourselves to the bare mention of the fact.

5.—NATIVE PASTORS.—The Native Pastors are of two
classes, and are easily distinguished as sown and country
pastors. It isnot simply the fact of one residing in town and
the other in the country, however, that divides these two
classes from each other. The town pastors, with one or two
exceptions, are men of higher social position than the large
majority of the country pastors. They are also men of
considerable ability and great preaching power. Most of
them have had superior education, having passed through
the usual course of training in the College, and are also able
to gather knowledge and appropriate it in a most wonderful
manner. All these things, in addition to their position as
pastors of the most influential churches’ in the island, give
them a character and influence, which few of their country
brethren can approach. They are, therefore, looked up to by
most of the pastors, teachers, and others in the country as
the vay aman-dreny ‘fathers and mothers) of all the churches,
and are.frequently appealed to to settle the difficulties which
from time to time arise among them. These town pastors
have recently formed themselves into a Committee (similar
to the Board of Congregational Ministers in London), and
134 THE, MADAGASCAR MISSION.

hold periodical meetings at which matters affecting the
interests of the churches are discussed. They have very
little executive power, however, apart from the missionaries
and the native churches. Hitherto no serious evils have
arisen from this arrangement, and the influence of the town
pastors on the country churches generally has been good.
Very rarely has the missionary found it necessary to check
what he deemed an undesirable exercise of authority. These
pastors usually work in harmony with the missionaries, and
so long as this is done we may presume that no evils need be
apprehended. The present weak condition of many of the
country churches also makes the judicious exercise of some
central authority not only desirable but absolutely necessary,
in order to prevent irregularities which would otherwise
occur. It is easy to see, however, how this influence of the
town pastor might, in the absence of the missionary, grow
into a serious evil with regard to the government of the
churches, especially as the habits and customs of the people
would tend to foster such a growth. This, by the way,. is
merely a possibility, for we do not believe that there is, at
present, the slightest probability that such will be the result.
It should be added that for the last four or five years these
town pastors have been receiving a small salary, which is
paid by the church without any help from the Society, but in
most cases the salary given is very small, and not sufficient
for the pastor and his family to live upon.

The country pastors are, as a rule, of a very different stamp
from those in the town. The majority of these have had no
special training for their work. With few exceptions they
are men of very limited knowledge. Some of them never
preach, and a few are even unable to read. Why then, it
may reasonably be asked, have these men been made pastors ?
It was simply because they were the best men that could be
found for the position. In some instances men have been
chosen for pastors because they have been persons of
influence and authority in the village, and the pastorate has
been offered them as a position of honour. In most cases,
however, they have been selected for the very good reason
that they were the best men in the place with regard to
Christian character, prudence, and ability to preserve order.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 135

In Madagascar, when a church is in want of a pastor, it
rarely thinks of looking beyond itself for the man—one of
its own members is almost universally appointed—and this
is not always a matter of choice merely, but frequently of
necessity. In the case of a village church wishing to choose
a pastor, the evangelist (if there happens to be one in the
neighbourhood), the missionary of the district, the pastor
of the town or mother church, and sometimes also the
neighbouring churches, are consulted; but the final election
rests with the church. The work of these pastors varies
considerably, according to their character and ability. A
few of them are content with the honour of the office, whilst
the preachers and deacons do the work; but others of them
are diligent, and do their best to discharge the duties which
devolve on the pastor of a Christian church. Taking them asa
body, they have considerable influence in the country, and are a
power for good. The majority of these country pastors receive
no salary. Sometimes a few baskets of rice are presented to
them at the time of harvest, and occasionally a few dollars at
Christmas time, but even this small recognition of their
services is by no means universal. The country pastors who
have been recently chosen are, on the whole, men of higher
attainments and better fitted for the work than those who
were appointed some years ago. The requirements and duties
of the pastoral office are becoming more generally understood,
and the churches are beginning to look for more suitable
men. There are now very few churches who would think for
a moment of appointing as pastor a man who is unable to
read, and who is unaccustomed to preach or exhort the people,
though this was frequently done eight or ten years ago. We
have no doubt that as the churches continue to grow in
knowledge and Christian attainments they will seek for more
intelligent pastors ; and when such pastors are secured, the
churches will also learn the Christian duty of providing them
with suitable support.

About four years ago, a number of the country pastors, who
had previously served in the army, were freed from govern-
ment service, and left at liberty to give the whole of their
time to the work of the churches. Many of the pastors,
however ‘and amongst these most of the pastors of the town
136 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

churches), still retain their position. in the army, or in the
Government, in addition to their pastorates. Some of these
are men of 10, 12, or 14 honours, which gives them a position
of influence among the people, and a corresponding responsi-
bility in government business. This may appear to some
people a strange and anomalous state of things, and no doubt
it is so, looked at from an English stand-point; but what
would be anomalous in England may be perfectly consistent
and reasonable in Madagascar. The missionaries might
perhaps prefer that all the native pastors were free from
government service, but the country is scarcely ripe for this
as yet. It should also be understood that the political position
of these men does not in the least interfere with their duties
as pastors of the churches, beyond the occuption of the small
portion of their time which is necessarily taken up in attend-
ing to their special government business.

The REv. W. E. Cousins, writing of the native pastors in
the Marovatana district, says :—

The number of pastors in this district is now forty-seven, showing
an increase of thirty in the ten years. These are chiefly men of no
special education or training; and in looking back on the past I do
not see: any great improvement in the character and intelligence of
the native pastors as a class. For the most part they became Christ-
ians too late in life to profit much by opportunities for special instruction
of which younger men have been able to avail themselves. From
what I see of their work, however, I believe many of them are exercising
a ,good influence, and are showing a fair amount of prudence and
fidelity in the superintendence of the churches. Their work is entirely
voluntary, as the churches of Madagascar have not yet shown themselves
willing to undertake the responsibility of supporting their pastors. They
pay something towards the support of their schools, and in many cases
give rice or a house to educated evangelists, but, with the exception of
some in town, none of the ordinary pastors receive any help from the
churches.

The REv. J. PEILL also writes :—

As to the pastors, greater discretion seems to have been used in choosing
them than can be said of the church members, although many of them
were chosen more because they were chief men of the villages they lived
in, than because of any peculiar fitness on their part. On the whole,
however, I am inclined to think that some of the most suitable men that
could be found have got into the pastorate, and of late of course greater
care has been taken in their choice than was formerly possible.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 137

The Rev. H. W. GRAINGE, after describing the gradual,
but decided, growth of the churches in the Andohalo district,
says :—

This growth is chiefly to be noticed in the pastors and leading men in the
churches, who, as a rule, present a remarkable contrast tg those who held
similar positions a few years since. Then the very independent form of
church government which had been adopted was a source of trouble to
me, on account of the persistent manner in which the people attempted
to fill up the various offices in the churches with men whose only claim
for consideration was founded on their local influence. This arose partly
from fear, and partly from ignorance ; but a great change for the better
has now taken place, and for the past few years, as vacancies have
occurred, the very best men have undoubtedly been appointed, and that with
the happiest results.

6.—NATIVE PREACHERS.—There are at the present time
nearly four thousand native preachers in connection with the
Madagascar Mission. This is more than double the number
reported in 1870. We are afraid, however, that the bare,
mention of this fact will produce a very erroneous impression
on the minds of our friends in England with regard to
the preaching power of the Mission. There is no order of
men in connection with any section of the English churches
which can be compared with these Malagasy preachers, so as
to give a correct idea of their character. The nearest approach
to them is to be found in the local preachers of the Wesleyan
and Primitive Methodist bodies, but these are, as a rule, of too
high a type to be compared with many of the native preachers
in Madagascar. A large number of these, preachers are
scarcely worthy of being recognised as preachers at all,
and much of their preaching is of a most profitless character.
Young men who are barely able to read, but who can stand
up and address the people for five or ten minutes on any
subject whatever, are sometimes appointed as preachers, and
reported as such in the annual returns of the churches. The
Malagasy are fluent speakers, and are exceedingly fond of
public speaking, and as preaching gives them frequent oppor-
tunity of exercising their favourite gift, it happens that many
are put on the preaching roll whose knowledge of the Scrip-
tures and Christian experience are exceedingly limited. Many
of these preachers have no true idea of the nature and object
of preaching, and their aim is frequently not so much to do
138 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

the people good as to please and amuse them. Much of their
preaching often consists of amusing anecdotes, fables, proverbs,
and such curious stories as they are able to collect, so as
to please the people and shew off their own fancied ability.
We must say, however, that this is not the character of all
our native preachers. There are some among them of whom
we have just reason to be proud, and who are of great service
to the Church. We are also pleased to notice that there has
been a great improvement in the style of native preaching
during the last few years. The churches are beginning to
appreciate a higher and more edifying kind of preaching, and
the young men are growing rapidly in intelligence and Scrip-
ture knowledge. Many who were preachers a few years ago
have now retired, being conscious of their unfitness for the
work; and there are some, who, though well able to preach
with profit to their hearers, are yet reluctant to officiate too
frequently, being anxious to make more thorough preparation
and to discharge their duty more worthily. On the whole,
there has been a most gratifying improvement among our
native preachers, and though there are some, especially in
the more distant villages, whose preaching is of a very indif-
ferent character, yet, considering the insufficiency of better
qualified preachers to meet the wants of the numerous country
churches, the missionaries have not thought it wise to put
too great a check on the zeal of young men to preach the
Gospel, even though not so well fitted for the work as they
could wish them to be. They have been anxious to train and
utilise this zeal for the good of the churches and the extension
of the Saviour’s kingdom, and there is no doubt that the
native fluency of speech and fondness for public speaking
have been a great blessing to the Church of Christ in Mada-
gascar, and have done much to spread the Gospel of Christ
_ in different parts of the island.

.

Of the native preachers in the Ambohibeloma district Mr. .
Peill says :—

The preachers form a very heterogeneous mass, many of them having
the very slenderest idea of what preaching means, and the most limited
knowledge of the Scriptures they profess to expound. It has been my
lot once or twice of late to hear the discourses of several of these preachers,
and I was pained beyond measure to find that so far from attempting
‘TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 139
to preach the Gospel, their main object seemed to be to amuse and
interest their audience, and to draw sometimes very far fetched moral
lessons from the old fables, folk-lore, proverbs, and fairy tales of their
ancestors ; evidently no conception of the high duties and responsibility
of the preacher’s office having as yet dawned upon them. The Malagasy
as a people have very great fluency of speech; they can spin a long
discourse out of the meagrest threads of matter, and do it too in such
a way as to interest each other. This gift, while it makes preaching
very popular among them, has its evils, as well as its advantages, and
in a new district like Ambohibeloma the evils shew prominently. No
doubt there are a few really earnest men among the preachers, truly
anxious, so far as their light goes, to do good to their fellows.

Jukes appears to have formed a miore favourable
opinion of the ability and usefulness of the native preachers
who are associated with him in the work of the eastern
district, as is evident from the following paragraph :—

In addition to the native pastors, there area great number of local or
itinerating preachers, who render effective service in making known
the Gospel. At Ankadibevava there are upwards of thirty of these valuable
helpers, and nearly every country church has a few, varying from two or
three to ten or twelve. These men, who answer to the methodist
“locals’’ in some parts of England, itinerate from village to village, and,
although not remarkable for intelligence or very fully instructed, they
often carry the message of salvation to dark places, where, but for their
efforts, the voice of the Gospel would seldom be heard. Engaged in
trading, or in government service, during the week, they endeavour to
seek the spiritual good of their fellow-countrymen on the Sabbath. I
think they have hitherto received too scant recognition in our reports.
They are a great support to the missionary and native pastors, and had
it not been for the assistance they have rendered it would have been
impossible to carry on the work that has been accomplished during the
past ten years. It should be added, that by -means of classes for their
benefit, and the aid of books specially prepared for their use, these men
are greatly improving both in character and preaching power.

Mr. Wills writes as follows of the native preachers in the
Ambohimanga district :— _

The eagerness to preach which nearly every one manifested during the
earlier part of the period under review has passed away, and now it is
often difficult to get the ordinary services supplied. This arises partly
from the improved knowledge and taste of the congregations, which are no
longer satisfied with mere empty talk. But honesty demands the acknow-
ledgment that the earnestness and fervour of an earlier day have, in
many cases, sadly declined. The money payments—though small—which
have in some cases been granted by the churches to preachers, have had
140 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

a bad effect, and have increased the difficulty of raising up an army of
well organised and earnest local preachers, such as have done such good
service among the various Methodist bodies. This is a point which
deserves the prayerful attention of the churches of the country.

The native preachers in the Andohalo district are thus
reported on by Mr. Grainge :—

Of occasional preachers we have now 161, béing an increase of 59 on
the total reported for 1870. The number was larger a few years since,
but the young men are becoming less ready to assume the office of
preacher than formerly. They are beginning to feel that something more
than fluency of speech is needed to occupy the position with credit to
themselves and profit to the congregations. Sometimes we have even
had a difficulty in finding supplies for the various services. The rambling
talk and pointless anecdotes that characterised so many services a short
time since are increasingly felt to be unsuitable, and public addresses
are required to have some point and substance in them to be acceptable.

7.—NATIVE EVANGELISTS.—There are two kinds of Native
Evangelists employed in the Mission, and these are usually
spoken of as the ¢razned and the untrained evangelists. The
trained evangelists are those who have had a special training
in the College before being sent out as teachers; and the
untrained are those who have had no special training for
their work, but who are men of intelligence, possessing a
fair amount of Scripture knowledge, and who have also
shewn themselves to be faithful and zealous in their Master’s
service. Of these two classes of native agents the untrained
are the older in the service of the Mission, and are also the
more numerous. These have been at work in the Mission,
more or less, since its re-establishment in 1862, and nearly
two-thirds of the evangelists now employed by the mission-
aries belong to thisclass. A large number of these teachers
were sent into various parts of the country immediately after
the destruction of the idols in 1869, and some of them have
remained at their posts ever since. The salaries of these
teachers are, as a rule, very small, varying from two shillings
to four or five dollars per month, according to the needs,
intelligence, and ability of the teacher. These men have
done a good work during the last ten or twelve years, and
are still most useful in many parts of the country. _ Their
number will, however, gradually decrease as the increasing
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. - 1qt

knowledge of the churches creates a demand for the better
educated evangelists, who are being trained in the Mission
College. The first lot of students trained in the College
finished their course of study at the close of 1873, and received
appointments, a few as pastors, but most of them as evangel-
ists in various parts of Imerina and in Betsileo. Since then
their number has been increased from year to year as young
men have finished their studies in the College, and will we
.trust go on increasing. At the present.time, many of the
most important towns in the two central provinces, several
stations in Antsihanaka, and a number of places on the east
coast, are occupied by these trained evangelists, who are
doing an excellent work in the churches and schools under
their care. The salaries of these teachers are higher than
the salaries of the untrained agents, and vary according to
family and other circumstances. They are maintained partly
by the L. M. S., partly by the native churches, and partly
also by the private friends of the missionaries. Some of them
have been sent out by the native Missionary Society, and
several others are supported by the Palace Church.

The following extract from a report of the Ambatonakanga
district shews the position and work of the native evangelists
in that district, and as these are much the same in all the
districts under the superintendence of the English mission-
aries, the extract now given may be regarded as indicative
of the general position and work of these valuable native
helpers :—

During the past ten years, several students educated in the College have
been located as evangelists over groups of from eight to ten churches
each in various portions of the district. Their duties, in addition to
itinerating as preachers to the various churches under their care,
consist in a general superintendence of church matters, rendering help
and counsel to the pastors and church officers, whom they also instruct in
Bible-classes, classes for reading, writing, arithmetic, and other branches
of rudimentary learning, besides exerting a stimulating influence in the
direction and supervision of the schools. At the present time, four young
men are engaged in work of this kind in remote parts of the district. The
work they are doing could not possibly be overtaken by the direct agency
of the missionary in charge, while in itself it is eminently adapted to the
churches in the present stage of their progress, and tends to build them
up in knowledge, faith, and piety.

i
142 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

The missionary in charge of the Ankadibevava and Am-
batomanga districts, in his review of the past ten years’
labours, makes the following reference to one of the trained —
evangelists, who were sent out in 1874 and supported by the
_ Palace Church. There were ten of these evangelists, and
‘what is here said of one might with equal truth be repeated
of nearly all his brethren. Mr. Jukes says :—

The evangelists form a class of valuable workers, who have been gradu-
ally increasing in number as the Theological Institution has been able to
train and send them forth into the several districts. Only a few years
ago there was not a single educated native evangelist throughout the -
whole of the two districts under my care. One of the first was appointed
and supported by the Palace Church, and of this brother, ‘‘whose praise
is in all the churches,’”’ and his work, I feel it a pleasure to bear my tes-
timony. I have never had a native colleague whose Christian character,
self-denial, and devotion to his work have afforded me so much satisfaction.
, Metaphorically he stands a head and shoulders taller than the generality
of our present evangelists. He had the charge of twelve churches, and
when he commenced his labours there were only two schools, with very
few scholars, and probably there were not more than forty adults
who could read; but when he left, after five years arduous work, there
were schools connected with all the churches, with an aggregate
of eleven hundred scholars; and there were nearly a thousand men
and women who possessed a new Testament, which they were able to
read for themselves. He was a moral power in the benighted neighbour-
hood in which he lived, and he will long be held in loving remembrance
by those whom he was instrumental in leading from the paths of vice to
those of truth and religion. This evangelist, to my great regret, was
recalled last year to occupy a responsible position in the Government,
and a successor was sent to fill his place, of whom I am not able to speak,
as yet, in very glowing terms. I trust he will improve as he gains expe-
rience.

It has already been stated that there are many older
and untrained evangelists, who, though not possessing the
ability of some of the younger men, are doing a good work
among the churches. Mr. Stribling thus refers to some of
these men, who for many years have been the strength and
support of the churches in Vonizongo and Valalafotsy :—

Several evangelists have been labouring in Vonizongo during the past
ten years, and with some amount of success. Two of these, Rainisoa and
Razaka, will be remembered as brethren who have suffered persecution
forthe truth’s sake. They have been acting also as representative pastors

for the whole district, and have done good service in advising and
stimulating many of our churches. Andriantseheno of Valalafotsy is
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 143

another veteran in the cause of missions. The enthusiasm of this good
man seems to increase as he advances in years. Last January, when
attending a meeting of the Imerina Missionary Association at Amba-
tonakanga, and hearing that no one was found ready to.go and teach
the distant tribes, Andriantseheno’s enthusiasm was with difficulty re-
strained by some of his brethren sitting by. He wished, then and there,
to stand up and offer himself, notwithstanding his advanced age, to go and
teach the heathen in any part of the island to which the association might
wish to send him. He was prevented from offering himself at the meeting,
but the next morning he came to tell me of his earnest desire to go and
preach the Gospel to the distant heathen tribes. Andriantseheno subse-
quently offered himself to a sub-committee of the missionary association,
and was mentioned as a candidate for the arduous work; but owing to
the weak condition of his own district and his advancdd age, I was
unable to recommend him for this service. On hearing our decision not
to send him, Andriantseheno replied :—‘‘If you cannot send me, I will
give you no blame; for it is Jehovah’s work and you missionaries are
His servants, and know best. At the same time I am indeed anxious
to work for Jesus among the heathen, for erelong I ‘Shall be too feeble
to do very much work for the Master.’’

8.—GOVERNMENT OF THE CHURCHES.—We have already
touched on one or two points which have a bearing on the
form of government adopted by the churches in Madagascar,
especially with regard to the election of pastors and the
influence of the town pastors and mother churches on the
churches in the country, but there are two or three other
matters which should be remembered in connection with this
subject. Mr. Joseph S. Sewell, of the Society of Friends,
who has spent several years in Madagascar, when speaking
at the annual meeting of the London Missionary Society,
held in Exeter Hall, in 1872, made the following reference to

‘the mode of government in the Malagasy Church :—

In the central part of the island during the days of the persecution there
arose a Church that is not exactly in accordance either with the Indepen-
dent Church, or the Episcopalian, or the Methodist, or the Society of
Friends. The nation has a Church of its own. In many respects it is
formed after the model of the Independent Church. Its pastors and
officers are chosen by the people, and the ordinances are regarded in the
light in which they are regarded amongst the Independents. But in the
metropolitan character of the churches at the Capital, and in the episcopal
character of the pastors who preside in them, and still more of the mission-
aries who influence them, there is not a little of the Episcopal form of
government ; and I believe it to be a great advantage. We sce in some
instances thirty or forty preachers belonging to one church taking their
144 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

turns in the services, and going out to visit in the district belonging to the
church—an arrangement similar to that which is made among the Metho-
dists. In that way there has been a great success. It is a source of
power which it would be wrong in us to stop in any way....Then, again,
in the unpaid character of the ministry. there, to a large extent, there
is some assimilation to the Society of Friends.

These words of Mr. Sewell, though spoken in 1872, are ©
applicable to the present state of the churches in Imerina.
A slight addition should, however, be made to them. Of
late years there has been a gradual approach to the
Presbyterian form of church government, and the form
which prevails at the present time is a sort of compromise
between Presbyterianism and Independency, with a little
mixture of Episcopalianism. The Presbyterian element is
seen in the influence which district and representative meet-
ings have on the churches generally. There are very few
country churches which stand absolutely alone. In addition
to the influence of the missionaries and of the town pastors
and churches, the churches in the country are more or less
united to each other. In some cases united church meetings
are held for the admission of members, and the transaction
of other business. In Imerina and Betsileo, united monthly
prayer meetings are held, at which five or six or more
churches come together for prayer and mutual exhortation.
At some of these meetings, after the ordinary service has
been brought to a close, matters affecting the interests of the
churches represented are discussed, and uniformity of action
is thus promoted. In addition to these monthly gatherings,
there are “four-monthly,” or “six-monthly” meetings held in
each district in Imerina, and attended by representatives
from all the churches in the district. These representative
meetings are of great importance, and have been productive
of much good te many of the churches. Difficult cases of
church discipline, the conduct of public worship, and many
other questions affecting the life and government of the
churches, are discussed at these meetings, and any conclusion
arrived at is usually received as morally binding on the
churches represented. Over and above all these smaller and
local associations are the Congregational Unions of Imerina
and Betsileo, which have grown to be institutions of consid-

-
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 345

erable power and importance, and have great influence on
the outward life of the churches, To these Unions we shall
refer more at length presently.

With regard to the admission of candidates for baptism
and church fellowship, an arrangement which was agreed
upon by the Imerina Union in 1868 is still adhered to by all
the churches. This arrangement requires that two months’
instruction shall be given to all candidates prior to baptism,
and an additional four months before they can be received as
full members of the Church. This wholesome regulation has
been adopted by the Betsileo churches, and is also followed in
Iboina, Antsihanaka, Tamatave, and by all the churches on
the east coast. A small catechism has been prepared for
the use of candidates, which is also extensively used. It was
also recommended by the Imerina Union a few years ago
that all candidates for church membership, except the aged
and infirm, should be taught to read before being received,
but this has not been so universally carried out.

Reference has been made to the monthly prayer meetings
which are held in the country districts. We must not omit
to mention that similar meetings are also held in Antana-
narivo and Fianarantsoa. The one in Antananarivo was
commenced August 3rd, 1863, and is the one from which all
the rest have sprung. It is held in the city churches in
rotation, and always on the Monday after the first Sunday’
in the month, when the largest churches in the Capital
are generally crowded to excess. It is an institution of
considerable importance in connection with the church life
of Antananarivo. It was begun as a missionary prayer
meeting, and this is still its nominal character, though we
are sorry to say that the main object of the meeting has
occasionally been nearly lost sight of, sometimes on account
of the thirst for sensational preaching, and at other times by
means of the undue prominence which is given to the singing,
each church being anxious to outdo its neighbours.

g.—CONDUCT OF PUBLIC WORSHIP.—There has been a
gradual improvement in the conduct of public worship during
the last ten years, both in town and country. The form of
146 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

worship adopted throughout the Mission is extremely simple,
and is similar to that in use in the Presbyterjan and most of
the Congregational churches in England. The form of
worship has not changed since the first introduction of the
Gospel; but in the cleanliness, order, and attention of the
people during worship there has, on the whole, been great
improvement. There is, however, much need for still farther
advance in these respects, especially in some of the country
congregations, which are only occasionally visited by the
English missionary. The greatest decorum during public
worship is to be found in the town and station churches,
and in those places which are most frequently visited by the
missionary or the native evangelists. In some of the country
chapels, it is often painful to notice the utter want of reverence
and the apparent absence of all devotional feeling. This,

however, is not to be wondered at when one takes into |

consideration the ignorance of the people, the wretched
buildings which some of them have to worship in, and the
careless manner in which worship is sometimes conducted
by the native preachers. The improvement which has
taken place, however, is encouraging, and we may look for-
ward to the future with hope.

Much has also been done during the last few years to
improve the psalmody of the churches, and not without suc-
cess. There has, in fact, been quite a revolution in the
singing department. The style of singing has been very
much improved, and a great many new hymns, as well as
new tunes, have been introduced to the churches. Several
original hymns have been composed both by natives and
Europeans, some good old English hymns have been trans-
lated, and a number of Sankey’s hymns have also been put
into appropriate Malagasy and are sung to his tunes. The
natives are very fond of singing, and some of them have a
good knowledge of music. It might perhaps be an advantage
to congregational singing if they were a little less fond of
change. Tunes have been introduced from a great many
English books, and are sung in our town churches; but those
from Sankey are most suited to the country congregations,
and some of them are exceedingly popular. ‘Hold the fort,”
“Safe in the arms of Jesus,”’ “Come to the Saviour,” “What

-

fee eee
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 147

shall the harvest be?’ and a few others, are great favourites,
and are sung every Sunday in a large number of our village
chapels. ;

On this subject Mr. Moss writes :—

As arule, a great improvement has taken place in the conduct of public
worship. The Scriptures are read and the prayers are offered with more
decorum and reverence than used to prevail. Many valuable hymns have
been composed, chiefly by native hymn-writers, which, with the tunes
from Sankey, Philip Phillips, and others to which they have been adapted,
have greatly improved the service of song, although perhaps this is rather
of a more lively nature than usually finds favour in churches of our order
athome. In many of the country churches, however, much is still lacking
in regard to decorum both in prayer and praise, while in two or three
churches near the Capital a band of music has been introduced under the
auspices of some person of influence, which while it may help to increase
the congregation cannot be said to add to either the harmony of the
services or to their devoutness.

Mr. Peill also says :—

Within the last few years I see marked changes as regards the
conduct of public worship in many of our churches. There is more order,
greater cleanliness, much more attention paid to what the preacher says,
and an evidently clearer comprehension of the things taught. Besides
this, the singing has greatly improved, and now, instead of a lot of dirty
slaves squatting in front of the pulpit, who could not read and were often
of very bad repute as‘to their moral character, leading the singing, in
many of our churches the children, scholars in the schools, lead, singing
the new hymns which they have learnt at school. Still in many of our
churches order and cleanliness are a desideratum, talking during service
and spitting of tobacco juice being far from uncommon occurrences.

10.—CHAPEL BUILDING.—The work of Chapel Building
has made great progress since 1870. A very large number
of new chapels have been erected; and there has also been
a wonderful improvement in the style of building. The
Ampamarinana Memorial Church was opened on the 28th
of March, 1874. New sun-dried brick churches have been
erected at Ankadibevava and Ambohitantely in the city, at
Fiadanana and Ambanidia and Isotry in the suburbs, at most
of the mission stations in the country, and also in many of the
most important villages both in Imerina and in Betsileo.
Not less than 700 chapels have been erected since 1870, of
which about 200 are of sun-dried brick, the rest being of
148 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

mud, The following report on Church Buildings from MR.
POOL will give some idea of the extent to which this work
has been carried on in Imerina, and will also shew some of
the improvements in point of style :—

The decade just closed has been marked by great improvement in the
work of Church Building. Perhaps few outward circumstances would
more forcibly impress the mind of a traveller, who having visited this city
in 1870, returned again in 1880, than the number of new preaching
stations and churches, erected on improved models in the Capital and
in the surrounding towns and villages; and conviction would force itself -
on his mind that the people have greatly advanced in their desire to
worship in comfort and order. Look in what direction you may from the
high ground on which the Capital stands, preaching stations seem to be
the most prominent objects, and impress you with the seemingly deep
teligiousness of the people. In the Capital, the brick churches at Am-
bohitantely, Ankadibevava, Ambanidia, Isotry, and the Stone Memorial
Church at Ampamarinana have been opened for worship; and in its
immediate vicinity, Fiadanana, with several other new erections, have
been occupied by their respective congregations. The impulses thus set
té work in the Capital seem to have permeated the whole of Imerina,
the model school-houses and churches, erected at stations where English
missionaries were located, contributing largely to the laudable desire for
better buildings than those so hastily run up after the burning of the
idols in 1869. For some time the movement partook of a competitive
character, each congregation trying to outdo its neighbour. This desire,
though somewhat commendable, had its felt drawbacks, inasmuch as it
led some congregations to attempt larger buildings than their needs
required, and the large dimensions aimed at in some cases crippled their
resources, and very sadly delayed the buildings. Still, with the ‘‘small
grant in aid,’’ it has been found that when patience has had its perfect
work, in one way or another the people, who until recently considered
the erection of a dwelling the work of a life, have completed their
sanctuaries so as to be able to use them, have forgotten their drawbacks,
receive the partial reward of their toil in increased comfort in worship, and
a building which (though unfinished to some extent) does credit to the
handicraftsmen employed in its erection.

During the year 1878, the rage for new churches or the renovation of
old ones seemed to have reached its maximum. For some months in the
early season of that year scarcely a week elapsed during which the
writer was not applied to for new plans, to visit some erection in the
country, or suggest alterations to some existing structure. Gratifying
indeed was such a state of activity, yet the pleasure was often mitigated
by having to refuse a request it was either not in our power, or thought
unwise, to comply with. We do not remember a more interesting time
in our experience than the season now under consideration. We were
able to assist in several cases, and the whole would have yielded us
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. — 149

unbounded pleasure but for the drawbacks before alluded to, and the
determination of the workmen to labour in crooked lines and leaning
perpendiculars. You visit a church building at a distance, to find your simple
Grecian or yet more simple Gothic window openings altered in execution
to some indescribable form, narrowing as they approach the arch; angles
which seem to partake of the luxuriant vegetation of the tropics, for they
have grown neither perpendicular, square, or straight; courses of bricks
laid without line or plummet, as if the nearer way to the end was through
a curve; cornices considered of course great improvements on the form
suggested. There are very happy exceptions, however, and you can visit
some erections where perpendiculars are considered and the parallel pro-
portions of doors and windows retained. The ingenuity of the people
in restoring parallels and perpendiculars would in some cases do credit to
workmen of better ability and education.

In Antananarivo all the better churches are supplied with benches,
those for the women being much lower than for the men, the sexes sitting
apart during worship.* Few of the churches in the country districts
have these desirable fittings, and where they are introduced, they exhibit
a variety that does not lend enchantment to the interior appearance of the
building. They appear to have been placed in the churches by different
donors, each of which has his or her idea of height, length, and pattern.

Platforms are to be found ig all the churches, differing greatly in form
according to the ingenuity, sometimes perhaps the incongruity, of some
leaders in the congregation. It would be quite an interesting task to
sketch the varied developments of native ideas these platforms present.
Here is one with a handsome arcade of pillars and arches stretching itself
through the entire width of the church, the capitals to the columns richly
carved, the ironwork enclosing the lectern of a really superior kind, and
although the two outer arches may be converted into something like
cathedral stalls, yet the ‘out ensemble is very striking, and deserving
of great credit. Another of these platforms seems blessed with a pair of
carved wings, not quite in keeping with those recently recovered on the
Assyrian Bulls. We may notice others in which some native talent has
been displayed, but we prefer to speak of their usefulness, as more than
one person is generally engaged at a service, and on special occasions,
‘such as Missionary Prayer Meetings, four-monthly and _ six-monthly
Union or Conference Meetings, they are a necessity which cannot be
dispensed with.

In several of these churches attempts at decoration have been made
by natives, hence a surbase, architraves to door and window openings,
with lines marking the extent of the walling, have been painted in
colours, or some attempt to represent flowers, creeping plants, etc.— these
interior decorations have been much improved by the use of stencil plates,

* The Church within the Palace enclosure is an exception, in it all the
benches are of uniform height, kneeling boards are supplied, and used
- when prayer is offered.
150 | THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

giving a regular repetition to the pattern, and by the discovery of the
colouring properties of a number of earths, so that a variety of colours
being now blended, the effect is in many respects very pleasing. Cornices
are quite a recent introduction, and these, when coloured so as to shew
their several members, contribute greatly to the general effect.

Another recent improvement is the very general introduction of glass
in the windows of the new churches. This glass is, as a rule, partially
obscured so as to check the effects of the rays of the sun, which are at
times very disturbing to the congregations. It is also worthy of notice
that nearly all the new buildings are planned for tile roofs. In several
cases thatch is put on for a year or two, but is removed as soon as the
money strength of the congregation will admit of the purchase of tiles and
laths. Shutters are employed in many cases to protect the use of glass
in the windows, and one must regard both the use of glass and tiles with
unfeigned satisfaction.

The REv. P. G. PEAKE thus describes a new model chapel
recently erected at the Isoavina mission station :—

Eleven years since, a congregation of fifteen or twenty people met in a
small wooden house in Isoavina. After a few Sundays, the congregation
so increased that one end of the house was removed and a temporary
wall erected so as to enlarge the building. This was soon followed by
a brick chapel thatched with rushes, and decorated inside with the first
efforts in native frescoes, a subject of laughter to Europeans, but the
wonder of wonders to the natives. This building came down in 1875,
and is now substituted by one more becoming. A special effort was
made to erect this chapel, which is intended to serve as a model for
the district. It occupies a convenient site outside the village on the
market side. It is enclosed by a ditch and wall, and is conspicuous
from a great distance. The building in itself is simple. It is a
parallelogram of 70 feet by 35, with a vestry having a lower roof to
the south end, making the total length 86 feet. The outside walls are
relieved .by deep buttresses and a porch to the west entrance. The
walls are 24 feet below the tie beams, varying in thickness from three
feet at the foundations to two at the wall plates for the tie beams,
and support a heavy roof of round headed tiles and a ridge tile with roll
and crest. The chapel is well lighted by ten narrow Gothic windows
on the sides, and a large similiar one 16 feet by 6 of thick ribbed glass
in the north gable. The whole is well plastered inside and out. The
walls inside are nicely coloured French grey, and are relieved by panels
in the brick work, which embrace the windows in pairs. The upper
parts of the walls are enlivened by a scroll cornice with scalloped pendants.
Round the lower part of the building runs a roll in brick as a head to
the sham wainscoating, which is represented by colouring of a dark
chocolate. The roof is open to the ridge, and plastered upon laths
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 151

nailed to the rafters, and the gables are ornamented by steps up to the
ridge. The cornice is coloured in parallel lines of buff and brown, and
brown and white, and the pendants as well as the steps up the gables
’ are enlivened by vermillion on their under sides, and as a finish to the
whole a beautiful illumination written upon white paper and cloth in
vermillion, gold, and. blue is fixed over the Gothic arch of the platform
recess. Its motto is: ‘‘Love the Lord thy God.’’ The platform is large,
having steps on either side, with open rail and closed double panelled
reading-desk. The total cost of its erection was £230. Of this money
460 was granted by the Society, 444 10s. came from friends in England,
£44 8s. from the missionary community in Madagascar, and £70 12s.
from the congregation. This was given in the shape of labour as well as
money.

In the Betsileo province there have also been extensive
improvements in the work of Chapel Building, as will be
seen from the following statement by Mr. Cowan :—

Just before the visit of the Queen in 1873, large numbers of chapels
were hastily erected. These were for the most part put up in the most
flimsy manner, being much more for shew than use, and the consequence
of this was that in about a year, or little more, all these buildings were
in ruins, and the people who had formed congregations in them were
clamouring for new buildings. Such was the state of the country churches,
and the town ones were not in a much better condition. Antranobrika,
the only brick church in Fianarantsoa, had low walls, and was altogether
more like a barn than a church. The other two were wooden buildings,
with great yawning chinks between the timbers, through which the wind
made melody, and the people caught colds. Fortunately, in the end of
1873, or the beginning of 1874, the church of Ivohidahy was burned to the
ground, and the people were stirred up to take into consideration the state
of their buildings. During the year 1874 nothing was done to improve
the existing state of things, but in the beginning of 1875 active measures
were at once taken, and buildings began to be erected all over the country.
The other two town churches, inspired by the new building which was
begun for Ivohidahy, at once made proposals for improvements. The
result of this was that Antranobrika was greatly altered and improved,
and Ambalavao and Ivohidahy had entirely new buildings. Many of the
country churches which have been built are of brick, and are likely to last
for many years. New and substantial churches have also been erected at
all the mission stations. Of the church buildings that existed in 1870 only
three remain, so that from the beginning of 1875 up to the present date,
about a hundred churches have been built in different parts of Betsileo.
Notwithstanding all the improvement that has been made, there is yet
room for much more. Chapels to be well built ought to be done under the
personal supervision of the missionary, as is the case in the Roman
Catholic and Norwegian Missions. Church building is still going on, and
in a year or so all the congregations will be in possession of good edifices.
x52 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

11.—CHURCH UNIONS AND NATIVE MISSIONARY SOCIE-
TIES.—It is now twelve years since the “Madagascar Congre-
gational Union,” or as we call it, ““The six monthly meet-
ing,’ was formed, and in looking back on its history, and
considering the influence it has exerted on the churches,
we have much cause to thank God for its formation, and for
the good it has been enabled to accomplish. The remarkable
extension of the Gospel near the close of the reign of
Rasoherina, and on the accession of the present Queen, made
such a Union very necessary, especially as the English
missionaries were too few personally to superintend all the
churches nominally under their care. By these periodical
gatherings much united action in matters of church order
and discipline has been secured, many abuses and irregula-
rities have been put a stop to, and the people have acquired
the habit of freely and fully discussing church matters,
which has done much to promote intelligent inquiry on all
subjects relating to the Saviour’s kingdom.

The first meeting of the Union was in December, 1868,
and was held in the Memorial Church at Ambatonakanga.
Since then meetings have been held every six months in the
various large places of worship in Antananarivo. For the
first few years twelve delegates were appointed by each city
church, and six by each church in the country; but, on
account of the increase in the number of the congregations,
and the growing interest in the discussions, it became neces-
sary to restrict the number of delegates to six for the city
churches and three for those in the country. Notwithstanding
this, the numbers in attendance still increased, and three
years ago admission tickets were resorted to as a means of
keeping out all who were not duly appointed delegates. This
additional precaution, however, has not resulted in reducing
the numbers who attend, and though only our largest town
churches are used for the gatherings, yet the buildings are
invariably inconveniently crowded, and hundreds are often
unable to gain admission.

The objects of the Union were thus stated at the first
meeting :—“1. To meet together for united prayer to God,
and for mutual counsel according to the Word of God. 2. To
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 153

promote mutual love among all the churches, and to shew
forth their unity in the faith of Jesus Christ. 3. To consider
what is right to be done to improve the practice of the
churches, especially in those matters which are great and
essential ; nevertheless, not to lay down laws, but to give
counsel. 4. To consider what is right to be done to promote
the kingdom of Christ.”

The meetings are opened by a preparatory service for
prayer and preaching held on the Wednesday afternoon* ; the
sitting commences at 8.30 a.m. on Thursday, and generally
lasts uninterruptedly for about five hours. The Chairman
of the London Missionary Society’s District Committee for
the year usually presides, and reads an introductory address,
which has much the same purpose as those delivered by the
Chairman of our English Congregational Union. The
subjects for discussion are then announced, and papers are
generally read on each subject, either by the missionaries or
by some of our native brethren, each paper being followed
by the freest discussion. These subjects are chosen by an
executive committee, which consists of the missionaries in
Imerina, the pastors of the city churches, and one other
representative of each church in the Capital. The following
is a list of the subjects which have occupied the attention of
the Union since its commencement, and will be interesting as
giving an instructive picture of church life in Madagascar,
and as shewing its difference from, and similarity with, that
in the more advanced churches in England. They are as .
follows :—The time of instructing those who desire baptism
and church fellowship (twice discussed); church discipline
and admonition (thrice) ; the marriage question—polygamy,
divorce, etc. (four times) ; what is proper to be done when any
wish to erect new chapels? (twice}; is it well that country
churches, where there are less than twenty members, should
choose pastors? Would it be advantageous if the pastors,
preachers and deacons, were chosen afresh every two years?
What message is proper to be sent to distant congregations
with regard to preachers visiting them, and giving themselves

* Formerly the days of meeting were Tuesday and Wednesday, but
latterly they have been Wednesday and Thursday.
154 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

out as from the Capital? (thrice); singing in public worship
(thrice) ; behaviour in public worship (twice); the authority
and duties of the evangelists sent out by the town churches
{twice) ; the independence of the churches of external control ;
preaching and its aims (twice); school instruction (four
times); how to increase the knowledge of the Scriptures in
the village churches ; singing at funerals; what is proper to
be done when any difficult business arises in the churches ;
the proper subjects for church fellowship; the admission of
members to the church; the duty of the church to those who
have been recently received; the training of children; the
qualifications for the pastorate of a Christian church, and the
pastor’s work (twice); the proper persons to be allowed to
preach in the churches; the desirability of teaching the adult
members of the congregations to read, and the manner of
doing it (twice); the duties of church members in regard to
their households, their general conduct, and the cultivation
of personal piety ‘twice); the responsibility of the church to
send the Gospel to those who have it not, and to teach those
who know it but imperfectly (twice); the Church’s dependence
on the Holy Spirit in all its endeavours to spread the Word
of God ; private and social prayer; public prayer; the collec-
tion of money for the spread of the Gospel; the sending out
of native missionaries to the distant tribes; Sabbath obser-
vance; the proper care to be taken of Houses of Prayer; the
duty of Christians to visit and exhort each other (twice);
Christian conversation ; the law to be followed in the conduct
of church business; the proper means of promoting the zeal
and efficiency of the churches; church finance (twice);
customs which should not be followed in the churches; the
means to be adopted to bring people to church and to induce
them to remain after they have joined it; the epidemics, and
the duty of the churches in regard to them.

There is usually no lack of speakers to discuss the subjects,
several often rising together, for the Malagasy are ready and
fluent speakers in stating their opinions before others. The
wise, just, and enlightened Christian sentiments frequently
expressed by our native pastors and preachers have often been
a source of surprise as well as of thankfulness to us; of course
there are exceptions now and then, and absurd and imprac-
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 155

ticable propositions are occasionally made, but these are soon
rejected by the good sense of the majority. Besides the benefit
arising from the expression of enlightened views on a variety
of subjects, a number of resolutions, or agreements, have
been passed at the various meetings, giving the deliberate
judgment of the assembly on several important points; and
although, according to the constitution of the Union, these
are not laws but counsel, they have very much the force of
laws, and are generally agreed to and followed by the
churches in Imerina. Still further to enforce upon the
people some of the subjects discussed, circular letters and
papers have sometimes been prepared and sent to every
church. Besides this, the proceedings of each meeting are
printed, the papers read being given in full, and a copy
forwarded to every church connected with the Union. In
manly cases these are read to the congregations instead of
sermons on the following Sundays.

In 1875, a Native Missionary Society was incorporated with
the Imerina Union, and is still worked in connection with it.
The formation of this society was a step in the right direction,
and we hope for much good from it as a principal means of
extending the Gospel among the numerous tribes of Madagas-
car. The first efforts of this Society to place teachers among
some of the heathen tribes were unsuccessful, on account of
the petty wars and unsettled character of the tribes to which
the teachers were sent. Its later efforts, however, have been
much more encouraging. All the churches in connection
with the Union make collections twice a year towards the
funds of the native society; the Palace Church contributes
most liberally ; and the London Missionary Society and the
Friends’ Foreign Mission Association also make annual
grants in aid. Much of the time of the six-monthly meetings
is now occupied by reports and discussions on the affairs of
this society, and occasionally it has been necessary to hold
special meetings on its behalf. The most noteworthy of
these is the one which was held in the Ampamarinana
Memorial Church on the 11th of July, 1878, for the purpose
of setting apart, and sending forth, five native evangelists.
This meeting was presided over by His Excellency the
Prime Minister, who gave some most appropriate and
156 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

excellent advice to the five teachers. It was one of the finest
meetings ever held in Madagascar, and has still an influ-
ence for good. We are sorry to say that the operations of this
native society are far more limited than we could wish them
to be. This is to be accounted for by the reluctance there
is on the part of suitable young men to offer themselves for
its service. The money is forthcoming, but the men are want-
ing. Funds are now lying in the treasurer’s hands for which
there is no immediate use. The churches need a fresh baptism
of the Spirit, and we pray that this may soon be realised.

The churches in the Betsileo province, following the
example of those in Imerina, have formed a Union of their
own, with similar objects to that in the central province.
It is thus reported on :—

Four or five years ago, the Betsileo Home Missionary Association was
formed, for the purpose of bringing all the churches more closely together,
and in order to make the church service and government uniform through-
out the province, as also to encourage mission work amongst the more
distant tribes. At first this association was composed of all the churches
in Betsileo, but in 1878 the churches of Ambositra withdrew from the
association and joined the Union in Imerina. For one or two years the
meetings of the association were held every six months, but latterly they
have been held only once a year. At these meetings papers have been
read bearing on church, mission, and educational subjects, and the
resolutions which have been adopted on these have gone forth to the
churches as laws, for their regulation and instruction. In this manner
many evils have been removed from the churches. They have also been
able to place teachers, or evangelists, in the Ibara and Tanala provinces,
who are supported entirely vut of the funds of the association. Last year
the collection in aid of this work was somewhat over £60. The committee of
management is composed of all the English missionaries, the evangelists,
and the principal pastors, with two delegates from the churches in
Fianarantsoa, Ambohimandroso, and Ifanjakana.

12,—VISITS TO DISTANT PARTS OF THE ISLAND.—During
the last ten years a number of visits have been paid to
distant parts of the island, both by Europeans and natives,
and much information has been gained by them with regard
to districts which were previously very little known. We
trust also that good has been done by these visits, both to
the churches which have not the advantage of regular super-
intendence, and to the tribes which have as yet but a very
limited knowledge of the way of salvation. The missionaries
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 157

in Betsileo, though few in number, have done their best to meet
the wants of the outlying districts by personal visits. In the
years of 1874 and 1875, Mr. Shaw visited the Tanala to the east,
under Ratsindraofana, on the latter occasion taking two
teachers, who were left there, but they only remained a short
time. In 1875, Messrs. Brockway and Cowan visited the
Tanala who are under Ihovana; and in the same year the Ibara
were visited by Messrs. Riordan and Shaw, who went to
Ihosy, the latter missionary also visited Ivohibe. In 1877, Mr.
Brockway made another visit to the Tanala, and Mr. Cowan
visited all the churches on the east coast from Andonaka in
the north to the river Faraony in the south; Mr. Riordan
also paid another visit to the Ibara. In 1878, Messrs. Shaw
and Cowan visited the Tanala in the district of Ivohitroso,
and towards the end of the same year Messrs. Cowan and
Baron visited Ikongo. In 1879, Mr. Cowan again visited
Ivohitroso, and extended his journey to the Ampidongy; and
Mr. Baron also, in company with Messrs. Sharp and Kitching,
visited the Ibara and the Tanala under Ihovana.

The missionaries and native pastors in Imerina have also
taken a fair share in these visits to remote churches and
distant parts of the island. The churches in Iboina, and
also those on the south-east and north-east coasts, have
been visited at different times by native pastors from Ime-
rina. In 1874, Mr. Sibree in company with Dr. Mullens
and Mr. Pillans visited the Antsihanaka country, and
Mr. Jukes the north-west coast. In 1875, Mr. Grainge paid
a visit to Mojanga, and some other towns in the Iboina
province; and Messrs. Sewell and Pickersgill visited Anka-
vandra, and a number of towns on the borders of the Sakalava
country in the west. In 1876, Messrs. Sibree and Street
visited the south-east part of the island; Mr. Moss and
Mr. Lord visited the country between Antongodrahoja
and Amparafaravola; and Mr. Houlder paid a visit to the
churches on the north-east coast. In 1877, Mr. Richardson
accompanied the teachers sent by the Native Missionary
Society to the Tanosy, south of the Ibara country, and
continued his journey as far as St. Augustine’s Bay on the
south-west coast. In 1879, Mr. Wills visited the churches
and the native evangelists on the south-east coast. In
"N\

158 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

August of the present year (1880) Mr. Grainge visited Anka-
vandra in. company with the native teacher recently appointed
to that station by the Native Missionary Society; and Mr.
Jukes has also recently visited Mahanoro and some other
places on the east coast. In addition to these, various visits -
have been paid at different times to the churches at Tamatave
and other places on the coast, by Messrs. Toy, W. E. Cousins,
Briggs, Jukes, and Lord. Of some of these long and special
journeys full and interesting reports have been written, which
contain a large amount of information with regard to the geo-
graphy and geology of the country, as well as in reference
to the religious condition of the people.

The following table gives a comparative view of the nume-
rical condition of the churches from 1870 to 1880 :—

ou| Se) | 22 8 8 £3 ay ® & | Contribu-
Date. | &S/S%| w/e) Be | BS | S22 | oe! “tions
Sl48/ 6/42/02 | 45 | so | oR ,
S 13] &| 4 aia ae
bh 5. a.
1870 621| 209 | ? | 1802) 20,951] 231,759] 9,492| ? 13697 7 10%
. 1871 801] 292] ? |2639)37,113/ 258,234|11,500] ? |246810 3
1872 722| 277| ? |2687/65,052|225,875/13,942| ? {1837 1 4
1873 ) :
inco| mp |lete} retu'rns.
1874 }

1875—~—1876} 902] 319 | ? |2804;58,955|215,787|16,948| ? |295410 5
1876—1877| 910] 344 | 107 | 3036 |67,010| 219,709] 17,607 |20,344|2703 2 8
1877—1878 |1088 | 386 | 156} 3468] 67,729| 215,258] 22,171 | 23,876|3781 10 3
1878—1879 |1142| 519 | 153 | 3907] 70,125 | 253,182] 25,535 |36,245|2720 4 I
1879— 1880 |1142 | 604 | 124) 4134] 71,585 | 244,197 | 26,217 |38,090/3146 8 9 |

The number of Chapels built in the Mission since 1870 is about 700, of
which about 200 are of sun-dried brick and the rest of mud, many of the
latter having brick gables and being of a moderately substantial character.

The Contributions of the churches, for all purposes, during the ten years
(including the money collected by the Palace Church for evangelistic and
educational purposes, is about £40,000.
yyw —
apt) itl i }
a *
\

apa “om

Nae
Anger? 5
“omy
"4 f ait
on, Ankaxobe =
| %, . {
| ny . ‘
| 750, Co Lo |
‘oO Ww Egy a anid]

1
Fuvreina
y J

“A‘dt drole ne |

an |

\
= g WwW
BS aon 3 &

— ° N |

4 ) |

8 & |

\ |

~ t
\ Bupoaciys ; pS |

Volovorona M'

Cc 14 Ints abe qe “0 so 1 ;
STaTiO |

Bruian by We

MAP OF MISSION DISTRICTS IMERINA, MADAGASCAR.

with esti ‘timated popula on,

Name of District. | Batimatea Adherenis. Name of District. ro Adherents.
~~ 70,000; 15,538 Ampamarinana a | 110,000 18,959,
100,000 14,128 | Ambohibeloma 80,000 | 12,015
85,000 | 13,991 | Andohalo ..... 30,000 5,763
77,000 | 22,810 | Isoavifa... 36,000 | 5,822
47,000 9,982 | Faravohitra .. a tat 10,046
95,000 } 20,156 | Ambohimanga | 2 000 | 6,339
200,000 18, 737 | Vonizongo (E. & w. ) 1B: 000 14,922 _
Totals ........ [1,105,000 | 189,708 }

TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 159

CHAPTER V.

THE DISTRICTS OF THE IMERINA MISSION.
+0 £9640

OR the convenience of European superintendence and
general mission work, the Imerina province has been
divided into a number of Missionary Districts. A brief
reference has already been made to these districts in Chapter
III., under the heading of THE IMERINA MISSION, but they
demand a more special notice. The principle on which the
division of districts has been made is geographical rather
than tribal, this being found most practicable as well as
most convenient. The tribes are sometimes so mixed up
as to make a tribal division almost impossible, whilst in
a few instances the tribal and geographical divisions coin-
cide. The origin of this arrangement is thus referred to in
the Review of the Madagascar Mission from 1861 to 1870 :—
“From 1863 and 1864 various country congregations were con-
sidered to be more or less closely connected with the town
churches, and under the superintendence of the missionaries
presiding over these churches. But irregularities had crept
in, and there was great need of some fair and well understood
arrangement. At the first meeting of the Congregational
Union* this question was considered, and a geographical
division made; each of the nine (town} churches taking upon
itself the responsibility of doing its utmost to evangelise the
district allotted to it. Very providentially this arrangement
was made some months before the burning of the idols,
and hence the work of supplying extra instruction to the
various districts was rendered comparatively easy, and
required no fundamental change in plans .of operation.”
According to this arrangement, Imerina was divided into
nine missionary districts, each being attached to one of the
churches in Antananarivo as its mother church. This arrange-
ment continued in operation until 1870, when two other dis-
tricts (Ambohimanga and Vonizongo) were formed, each being
placed under the superintendence of an English missionary.

* This meeting was held in December, 1868.
169 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION,

In 1872, the Isoavina district was formed; and in 1874,
during the visit of the Deputation, a general redistribution of
the districts took place, which resulted inthe formation of five
new country districts, to each of which an English missionary
was appointed. Two of these have been reunited to the
districts of which they originally formed a part, so that there
are now fifteen districts in connection with the Imerina
Mission, each of which will demand a brief notice.*

This division of the country into missionary districts is an
arrangement of great importance, and needs to be taken into
consideration in any statement respecting the manner in
which the Mission is conducted. It forms the basis of all
missionary operations, and also affects the relation of the
churches to each other. The size and special circumstances
of his district have to be taken into consideration by the
missionary in the regulation of his time, in the appointments
of his teachers, in the arrangement of his Bible-classes and
other meetings with his people, in the disbursement of his
funds, and in all his plans of work. It is according to this
district arrangement that the grants of the Society in aid of
education, native agency, and other departments of work,
are distributed, and that the reports of mission work are
from time to time supplied; and, what is of still more
importance, it is an arrangement by which the greatest
amount of work can be done by the missionary with the least
waste of time and the least possible expense.

The accompanying map, kindly prepared by Mr. William
Johnson, of the F. F. M. A., will shew the reader the relative
positions and comparative sizes of the various districts. An
estimate of the population in each district is also given as
correctly as can be ascertained. According to this estimate,
the total population of the Imerina province is 1,105,000. This
estimate is based on general observation, and does not rest
on any government census or authorised statistics; but we
think it may be regarded as, at least, approximately correct.

* Since the above was written, the two districts in Vonizongo have been
united, thus reducing the separate districts in the Imerina Mission to
fourteen.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 161

We now proceed to give a brief description of each district,
shewing their special characteristics, and the progress of
educational and evangelistic work which has been made in
them during the last ten years. We take the districts, as
nearly as possible, in the order of their formation, but following
chiefly the order of seniority in the town churches to which
all the districts were originally attached.

1.—THE AMBATONAKANGA DISTRICT.—Ambatonakanga is
the name of a suburb of Antananarivo, situated some way
down the northern slope of the hill upon which the city is
built. The site of the Church was formerly occupied by Mr.
J. Cameron, whose house and workshops were there. These,
however, being destroyed by fire in 1829, were not restored,
but a chapel was built instead; and in 1831, a church was
formed under the pastoral care of the Revs. D. Johns and
J. Freeman. During the persecution the chapel was pulled
down, and gave place first to a prison and then to a stable.
The church was reorganised in 1861. For three years
(1862—1865) it was under the care of the Rev. W. Ellis, and
afterwards (1865—1870) of the Rev. G. Cousins. In 1870, it
was transferred to the care of the Rev. C. F. Moss, who is
the missionary at present in charge. The first Memorial
- Church was erected at Ambatonakanga, in memory of the
Christians who were imprisoned there in the dark days of:
persecution. The Church was opened on the 22nd of January,
1867, and occupies a most suitable and commanding site at
the junction of the principal thoroughfares leading east, west,
north, and south.

The district attached to the Ambatonakanga church
lies to the north of Antananarivo, inclining to the west.
It is large, and extends to a-distance of five or six days’
journey from the Capital. The southern part of it is thickly
populated, and contains a number of large and important
villages with churches and schools much more advanced than
‘those in many other parts of the country; but the northern
and more distant part is both more sparsely populated
and much less advanced in Christian knowledge and
civilisation. This portion of the district is also very marshy,
and in much of its extent, is covered with fever-breeding
162 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

swamps. Consequently, it is frequently visited by malarial
fever and other epidemics, and the work of the missionary
and evangelists is often greatly interrupted by such visita-
tions. Notwithstanding these painful interruptions, and the
fact that the number of adherents has been considerably
reduced by recent epidemics, much progress has been
made in this district since 1870, both in evangelistic
and educational work. This is shewn by the following
statistics :—

2| alk a ee g ad wel ¢é 3 as 58
eistsiele8) 8s |Z&|88s] 8s |£8| BE
Date. |%|/ 3 lb 9 | 82] §& |Bsl|ssl8|'s [Sei 24
Blais} £)/OS| § |<2 /FSiZ) 3 lige) 25
ce < |} 8] 2} / 7) 8) 8s
oO. @ 2
bh Sa,
1870 |37|19| ?| 197 | 2368 | 14,460] 1169] ? | 29 |1258| ? [309 12 3
1880 ./ 66) 62| 4 |291 | 8049 | 15,538 | 2979 |2991| 57 |2061 |1745/353 3 4
Increase] 29] 43|4| 94 | 5681} 1,078 | 1810 |2991} 28 | 803 |1745] 43 11 1

Thirty new chapels have been built in the district within the
ten years, of which fifteen are of sun-dried brick and fifteen
of clay.

Estimated population : 70,000.

2.—THE AMPARIBE AND AMBOHIDRATRIMO DISTRICT.—
Amparibe is the name of a district of Antananarivo on the
north-west side of the town, a little lower and farther west
than Ambatonakanga. The Church at Amparibe was com-
menced in 1861, immediately after the decease of Ranavalona
I., and the accession of Radama II. The meetings were held
at first in the house of a poor man named Rainikoto, who was
afterwards chosen one of the pastors. In 1863, a large clay
chapel was built, which was replaced in 1870 by a very
commodious brick building erected by Mr. W. Pool. The
Rev. W. E. Cousins took charge of this church on his arrival
in Madagascar in 1862, and has continued the charge to
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 163

the present time. The large suburban church at Isotry is
associated with Amparibe, but is under the special care of
Mr. Parrett, together with a number of the country stations
in the district.

The Amparibe district is to the north-west of the
Capital, and'to the west of the Ambatonakanga district.
In consequence of Mr. Cousins having been appointed
principal .reviser of the Malagasy Bible, the Amparibe
district was divided in 1874, and a new mission station
was formed at Ambohidratrimo ‘a large town about
twelve miles north-west of Antananarivo), and placed under
the’charge of the Rev. R. Baron. The largest portion of
the district was associated with Ambohidratrimo, leaving
Mr. Cousins in charge of the Amparibe and Isotry churches,
and six village churches, about four or five miles distant
from the Capital. On Mr. Baron’s removal to the Betsileo
Mission in 1878, the two districts were reunited, and again
placed under the care of Mr. Cousins, with the assistance of
Mr. Parrett as explained above.

This district, like the adjoining one of Ambatonakanga,
has suffered severely from the recent epidemics, and the
number of adherents is about 4000 less than was returned two
or three years ago. There has also been a decrease in the
number of church members within the same period. But
notwithstanding this, the following statistics shew decided
progress in the district since 1870 :—

a . : g : of

Sle )e B} a [22)/ ub] S| & [oe 3

elgliea| s|/s a= |SYijedl]sl 6 ler G2

mia) s) 2 (Pe) 3 |S2)F515/ 3 |OS| Bs

8 ea © = Og

h s. a,

1870 137/17] ? |151/2185]13,870 | 712} ? |x1/ 653] ? 1345 19 4
1880 |60)47| 8 | 484 7420 14,128 | 2330] 3696] 59 | 2573 | 1043/334 11 0
Increase| 23} 30) 8 |333]5235| 258 | 1618) 3696] 48) 1920) 1043

164 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

Fifty-five new chapels have been erected in the district since
1870, of which eight are of sun-dried brick and the rest of
clay. Estimated population: 100,000.

3-—THE ANALAKELY DISTRICT.—Analakely is the name
of a district in the northern part of Antananarivo, and near to
the large weekly market-place. During the time of the former
missionaries, government works for the manufacture of
various useful articles and for teaching the art of carpentering
were established at Analakely, under the superintendence of
Mr. James Cameron. These works are still carried on under
native superintendence. During the reign of Ranavalona I.
a large kabary was held at Analakely, at which many of the
Christians were condemned. Soon after Radama II. came to
the throne, application was made to him to grant the use of
a large building (formerly used as a carpenters’ workshop)
for the use of the Christians as a place of public worship.
The request was granted, and the place was soon crowded
to excess with those anxious to hear the Word of God.
Upon the arrival of the missionaries in 1862, the Rev.
J. Duffus was appointed to the charge of the church,
which he held for about a year, after which he returned to
England. The Rev. J. Pearse succeeded Mr. Duffus, and
continued in charge until his return to England on furlough
in 1873. During the year 1865, the members of the church
and congregation, assisted by the missionaries, built a large
chapel of sun-dried brick, which was opened for public wor-
ship in the month of November. After Mr. Pearse’s return to
England, the church was for a short time under the care of
the Rev. C. F. Moss. Afterwards it was associated with the
College, and transferred to the care of the Rev. G. Cousins,
who is the missionary now in charge.

The district connected with the Analakely church lies to
the north of Antananarivo, inclining to the east, and extend-
ing to a distance of several days’ journey. The nearer portion
of the district contains a number of large and important
churches, and many flourishing schools, whilst the more
remote parts are less advanced. Several educated evangel-
ists and trained school-teachers have been stationed in the
TEN -YEARS’ REVIEW. 165

district during the last few years, and great progress has
been made since 1870. The following are the statistics :—

£\s(3| éled| 2 leBluglal ales] $3
aisls|2les| € |£e|s8le| ¢ |2e| BE
Date. |ml/5|%) S/2e| 5 |Ss/eels| 3 |Se| Be
Bléls|2|68| & |=2/82\5| 8 |g2| £5
eg ‘ a
h S. a.
1870 | 40/11] ? |116)1646]11,659]/1037| ? |30)1126] ? |192 9 4
1880 |63]|29|13|240|5942| 13,991| 3240] 4269] 42| 2719/2025 | 337 4 0
Increase] 23 |18|13|124]4269) 2332 |2203|4269!12/1593| 2025 | 144 14 8

Thirty-six new chapels have been built since 1870, of
which twenty-five are of sun-dried brick and eleven of clay.

Estimated population : 85,000.

4.—THE AMBOHIPOTSY DIsTRICT.—Ambohipotsy is situated
at the extreme south of the hill on which Antananarivo is built.
The church at this place was commenced in the dwelling
house of the Rev. R. Toy, in December, 1862. In March,
1863, a clay chapel was completed on ground granted by
Radama II. for that purpose, and a church of forty-eight
members was formed. In 1864 a larger and more substantial
chapel was erected, which was capable of accommodating
eight or nine hundred persons. The second Memorial Church
was erected at Ambohipotsy, in memory of the martyrs who
were put to death at this place. The Church was opened
on the 17th of November, the Queen and the Prime
Minister being present at the opening service.

‘This church was under the charge of Mr. Toy from its
commencement until his return to England on furlough and
in ill-health in 1870. Both Mr. and Mrs. Toy laboured most
indefatigably at Ambohipotsy during their residence there,
and the church became one of the strongest in the Capital. In
1870, the Rev. W. Montgomery was appointed to the charge
166 © THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

of the Ambohipotsy church and district, and still holds the ap-
pointment, though at the present time he is absent on furlough,
- and the Rev. J. A. Houlder is temporarily supplying his place.

The district attached to the Ambohipotsy church lies direct
south of Antananarivo. It is very large, and extends to a
considerable distance. There is a dense population in the
nearest portion of the district, and a number of large and
important churches are to be found within an hour’s ride of
the Capital. The more distant partis not so thickly populated,
but yet contains many important towns and villages. The
church at Fiadanana, for which a memorial building of sun-
dried brick with a tiled roof has been erected, is in association
with Ambohipotsy, and also the large church at Alasora,
where one of the Palace Church evangelists has laboured
successfully for several years. In 1874, it was found desirable -
to divide the district, and a new mission station was formed
at Tsiafahy, with which were associated about forty congrega-
tions. In the following statistics we have included those of the
Tsiafahy district, in order that the numerical progress in the
whole district formerly attached to Ambohipotsy may appear :—

é]../2] 3 -| g as |. fos a
| S ~ 15% |o ‘a7 for)
80 e/21Oo!] Bw lao /M; 3 |S» =
ey al] F) | ap gp |? a) és
oO a &
4 Ss. a.
1870 [72/50] ? 1378] 4,409|37,916| 1960] ? |4o\2081| ? | 616 8 10
1880
Ambohi-
potsy |58|65| 2 |495 /10,764/22,810 | 2092/2951 |50|2575| 1667) 394 12 0
1880
Tsiafahy] 45|26| 5 |116| 1,653] 9,981] 643] g05|28) 862} 523] 63 4 10
Increase] 31/41} 7 |233| 8,008 775 | 3856 | 38 1356] 2190

The number of new chapels built in the two districts since.
1870 is about eighty, of which about twenty-five are of
sun-dried brick and the rest of clay.

Estimated population in the Ambohipotsy district: 77,000. ;
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 167

5.—THE TSIAFAHY DISTRICT.—Tsiafahy is a town about
fifteen miles south of Antananarivo, and was made a mission
station in 1874. The town itself is not large, but it is
surrounded by a number of towns and villages, and the
district contains a considerable population. There has been
a church at Tsiafahy since 1869, and though the church
members are only about ninety, there is a congregation of
from seven to eight hundred. The situation is healthy, and
the town commended itself to the judgment of the Deputation
and the missionaries as a suitable centre of missionary
operations; the large congregation already gathered there
was an additional recommendation. The Tsiafahy district
was formed chiefly from the south-eastern portion of the Am-
bohipotsy district ; but it also took in several churches from
the south-western portion of the Ankadibevava district. The
distance even of the nearest church from the Capital ren-
dered it impossible for such assistance to be given by the
city church as could have been desired; and on this account
the formation of these churches into a separate district was
effected, which was placed under the superintendence of a mis-
sionary to reside at Tsiafahy. The Rev. T. G. Beveridge was
the first missionary appointed to the superintendence of the
‘district, and he continued in charge until 1877, when he left
the island to return to England. His melancholy death at
sea with his wife and two children is referred to in another
part of this Review. On the retirement of Mr. Beveridge,
the Rev. J..A. Houlder undertook the superintendence of
the district, and he is the missionary at present in charge.
A good mission house has been erected at Tsiafahy, and also
a commodious new chapel suited to the large congregation.

One of the first evangelists supported by the Palace Church
was stationed at Tsiafahy, but, unfortunately, he and the
missionaries have never been able to work harmoniously
together. This evangelist is the only one of the folo dahy (ten
evangelists) sent out by the Palace Church in 1874 of whose
character and work we are not able to speak in the highest
terms. This want of harmony between the missionary and the
evangelist has been a serious hindrance to the mission work
of the district, which though fairly successful would probably
have been attended with still greater success under more
168 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

favourable circumstances. These difficulties, however, no
longer exist, and the prospects of the district were never
brighter than they are at present. The following statistics
shew the numerical progress which has been made in the
-district during the last five years :—

wn A . 4 .
£\s/3| Ele] 2 leSloe| 4 | ajes] 23
Date. |&/S/S8)/ 5/58) 8 jSoles] § | Sisk] BS
o/a/% alee} & joie 8] = | 8le8) ea
Bias) £ Cg) 3 2/5) 4% aloe) es
é| | “L*3 S| OS
£ 5. a.
1875/39/16) 2| 52] 616] 8567 | 197] ? | 28 |965/327| 60 § Oo
1880 |45|26) 5 |116/1653/ 9982 | 643 | 905 | 28 |862| 523} 63 41
Increase} 6 | 10] 3 | 64/1037] 1415 | 446} 905 196] 2 19 10

Estimated population: 47,000.

6.—THE ANKADIBEVAVA AND AMBATOMANGA DISTRICTS.
—Ankadibevava is situated on the eastern side of the city,
close to the gate by which people coming from Tamatave
usually enter the Capital. The population on this side of
the city is very large. The church here was formed in 1863,
and at first consisted of twenty-five persons. The first
chapel was a temporary building of zozovo, or rushes. This
was afterwards replaced by a more substantial building of
clay, which was opened on the 22nd of December, 1865. The
present chapel, which is of sun-dried brick with glass
windows and tiled roof and neatly finished internally, was
erected under the superintendence of Mr. Pool, and was
opened for Divine worship on the 8th of July, 1874, the late
Dr. Mullens and Mr. Pillans, Deputation from the Society,
taking part in the opening services, The first missionary in
charge ofthe church at Ankadibevava was the Rev. J. Kessler,
who came to Madagascar in October, 1863, and left again
in May, 1865. At the close of 1866, the church was placed
under the care of the Rev. C. Jukes, who is still in charge.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 169

The district associated with Ankadibevava lies to the
south-east of the Capital, and east of those of Ambohipotsy
and Tsiafahy. It has already been mentioned that in 1874
this district was divided, and the eastern portion of it placed
under the superintendence of the Rev. T. Rogers. This
arrangement, however, lasting but a very short time, the two
districts were again united under the care of Mr. Jukes. The
name of Ambatomanga, the proposed new mission station, is
still retained, though the two districts are practically one
and are connected with the mother church at Ankadibevava.
Much progress has been made in the district since 1870,
though there is still a great deal to be done before all the
people are brought to a saving knowledge of. the Gospel.
One of the Palace Church evangelists has laboured most
successfully at Ambatomanga and in the surrounding villages
for about six years.. He has now been removed, but has left
most pleasing results of his faithful and arduous labours.
There are also sixteen other evangelists stationed in various
parts of the district, some of them at a considerable distance |
from the Capital. The services of these teachers have
contributed much towards the advance which is manifest
in the following statistics :—

A : ° 5 ? Ls] aa
Oo} .| 2] 9 2 -| ¢

slala 8 ag a ag ng o| 2 |8s 22
Si16/3/ 2/88 9 |S¥i|&alo] & |B 5 EB
Date. |B) a)%| Sis] & jes|S2nie|'s |se| 2a
bole) a] 2 588i € [4 e/A2io/ 3 |S e ea
Ay] & Hu |Y us) — Hn Hn |Oa ann
g\la;*| 4) < | 8] 9 a| 8s
os) a &

5s. d@.

1870 [53/14] ?|177|1607)19,013 | 822) ? |41/1647} ? |528 4 oO

1880 |g0|70/17| 413 | 7861 | 20,156 | 2517 | 3324] 73 | 3231 | 2115|349 13 0

Increase | 37 | 56/17 | 236|6254| 1143 | 1695 |3324|32|1584| 2115

Sixty new chapels have been built in the Ankadibevava
and Ambatomanga districts since 1870, of which thirty are of
sun-dried brick and thirty of clay. :

Estimated population : 95,000.
179 _ THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

7-—THE AMBOHITANTELY DISTRICT.—Ambohitantely is the
name of a small district in the heart of the city, east of Ando-
halo, and near to the residences of many of the chief officers-
The church was formed in 1863 at Antsahabe, but afterwards
removed to Ambohitantely, where a temporary chapel was
built in 1864. This was the first place of worship opened ‘in ©
the city proper. The present building was opened onthe 24th
‘ of July, 1872. It is of sun-dried brick with glass windows and
tiled roof, towards the erection of which the London Missionary
Society contributed £200. On the formation of the church at
Andohalo, the Ambohitantely congregation for a time united
with that church, in accordance with the urgent advice of the
Rev. W. Ellis and most of the missionaries. After a few months,
however, the greater part of the congregation returned to their
former meeting place ; and after a short time, the Rev. R. G.
Hartley, who had charge of the church in the first instance,
resumed the pastoral oversight of them in conjunction
with the neighbouring church at Andohalo. At the com-
mencement of 1867, Mr. Hartley’s health no longer permitting
him to undertake the pastorate of two town churches, and
the church refusing to accede to the recommendation of the
missionaries to unite with the neighbouring churches, the
oversight of the church and the supply of the pulpit was
undertaken by the missionaries generally. Subsequently to
this arrangement, the Ambohitantely church was placed
under the care of the Rev. C. Jukes, which he undertook in
addition to the superintendence of the church at Ankadi-
bevava. After a while, Mr. Jukes finding that on account
of the increasing claims of the church and district of Anka-
dibevaya, he was no longer able to continue the charge of
Ambohitantely, an arrangement was made with Mr. Sewell
of the F. F. M. A., by which the Friends undertook the
superintendence of the Ambohitantely church and the country
churches associated with it, to be worked in harmony with
the L.M.S. This arrangement, which was made in 1868,
has continued in operation to the present time, and has from
the first given the greatest satisfaction to all the parties
affected by it. With the Ambohitantely church is now
associated a large district lying to the south-west of Anta-
nanarivo.
An account of this church and its district, since they have
been under the superintendence of the Friends, is given in

Chapter XI. on the Work of the Friends’ Foreign Mission
Association. The following are the statistics :—

121 ¢ . . .
S/éal Slee) 2 jog legla| sles] 22
Si/Sio/-a}es SB |#" /e@slo] gs jee 3

Date. | F/2/% 2) Ze] & |Belesls| s iss| Ba

bisis| 2/68) § |4e/Heis) S jee) Hs

g, as) “| < | a] 8 | Of

0 i} =
hs. a.

1870 | 42/5] ?| 62 | 509 | 9735 | 338 | ? |20/ 555 | ? | 1307 5
1880 |118] 15 |14| 297 | 3358 | 18,737 | 1663 |2254| 88} 3203 |2114] 260 8 o
Increase! 76 | 10/14] 235 | 2849 | gooz | 1325 |2254|68|2648 |2114| 130 0 7

Eighty-seven new chapels have been built in the district
since 1870, all of which, except that at Ambohitantely, are
of clay, though many of them have brick gables.

Estimated population : 200,000.

8.—THE AMPAMARINANA DISTRICT.—Ampamarinana is
the name of the rock on the west side of the Capital ovet
which the martyrs were thrown in the time of persecution,
and means Zhe place of hurling. The full name by which the
natives usually designate the spot on which the Memorial
Church stands is Ambonin’ Ampamarinana, literally : the top
of the place of hurling. On the 28th of March, 1879, fourteen
native Christians, who declined to give up the “praying” and
forsake their Saviour, were hurled over the precipice, and
dashed to pieces on the broken rocks below. The Ampamari-
nana rock forms the boundary of the city on the west side, and
immediately above it is one of the most thickly populated parts
-of the Capital, reaching up to the Palace and its surrounding
buildings, which are about two hundred yards east of the Church.
The summit of the rock was selected by Mr. Ellis asthe site of
the fourth Memorial Church, and was granted by Radama II
for this purpose. The first temporary building, erected for
172 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

Divine worship at Ampamarinana, was opened on the 15th of
August, 1864. The church was formed on the 5th of October in
the same year. The Memorial Church was opened on the 28th
of March, 1874, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the terrible
occasion on which eighteen native Christians were condemned
to death at Analakely, four of whom, being of noble descent,
were burned alive at Faravohitra, andthe remaining fourteen
were thrown over the cliffs at Ampamarinana. The Church
stands close to the very spot on which those faithful witnesses
to the Truth must have stood. Dr. Mullens and Mr. Pillans took
part in the opening services, which were of a most interesting
and impressive character. The sufferings of the martyrs and
their noble confession of the Saviour were in everybody’s
thoughts, and were prominently set forth in the prayers which
were offered, the hymns which were sung, and the sermons
which were preached on the occasion. This church has been —
from its commencement, and is still, under the care of the
Rev. B. Briggs.

The district associated with the church at Ampamarinana
lies direct west of the Capital, and is bounded by the river
Ikopa on the north and the Friends’ district on the south.
Originally it included what is now the Ambohibeloma
district, and extended to a distance of many days’ journey,
even to the borders of the Sakalava country. Since the
division which took place in 1874, the Ampamarinana
district has been limited to a distance of about twenty-
five miles from Antananarivo, the remaining and more distant
portion being now the Ambohibeloma district. The large
suburban church situated at the south side of the plain of
Imahamasina, “the place of consecration” where at’ times
the sovereigns of Imerina have been crowned, is associated
with Ampamarinana; and also the large and important
church at Fenoarivo, where one of the Palace Church
evangelists has done an excellent work, and where a large
new brick chapel is being erected ‘now near completion),
under the superintendence of Mr. Pool. The following
Statistics shew the numerical progress which has been
made in the district which was attached to Ampamarinana
at the beginning of the present decade:— —_- mo
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 173

e| |al - | ogi & 3| 88
Cc] ./¥ | a : 2 : 29
Si€l2ls iss] & ie2lge/3| 8 jee) Be
Date. (2/3 /%/S |/32! 3 |Selazl2|'s |Se| 8a
bls |s| 8 |Os) 8 |e /Fala|3 el es
ei (e/a) &) «| sl] 3) |? |Pa; 8s
3 i I od On
s |, &
h Ss. a
1870 [92/25] ? | 168] 2071|31,703| 963 | ? |52\r810| ? | 372 7 11
1880
Ampama-
rinana 59/48] 6 |292|6524/ 18,959] 1524|2714|5813267/1824| 217 5 8
1880
Ambohi-
beloma | 80/31] 5 |221/2375}12,015| 335|1585|77|3059|1786) 94 14 0
Increase | 47|54/11/345| 6828 896 | 4299 | 83/4516] 3610

Fifty new chapels have been built in the Ampamarinana
district since 1870, of which four are of sun-dried brick and
the rest of clay.

Estimated population : 110,000.

9.—THE AMBOHIBELOMA DISTRICT,—Ambohibeloma is a
large and important town situated on a high hill about thirty
miles west of the Capital. It is sometimes called by the
natives “little Antananarivo,’ and “Antananarivo in the
west.” This is partly because it is built on the top of a hill,
but also shews the importance of the town in relation to the
surrounding villages. It forms an excellent centre for mis-
sionary operations in a populous but very benighted district.
The church: at Ambohibeloma may be fairly considered as
the mother church of the district, having been commenced in
1863, during the reign of Rasoherina, whereas all the other
churches have been begun since the accession of the present
Queen, and the majority of them since the destruction of the
idols in 1869. This may therefore be regarded as an entirely
new district, and nearly all the good which has been effected
in it is the fruit of the last ten years’ labours.

_ The size and importance of this district, together with its
great distance from the Capital, rendered it impossible for the
174 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

missionary in charge of the town church at Ampamarinana

do anything like justice to the multitudes of people who were

needing instruction, and the necessity of forming a new mis-

sion station at Ambohibeloma became evident to all. Early

in 1874 the matter was definitely arranged, and the Revs.

W. C. Pickersgill and J. Peill were placed in charge of this

important station. New life was thus introduced into the
district, and from that time the churches began steadily to
improve. At Ambohibeloma, in addition to a large mission
house, a handsome building has been erected which is used
both as a church and school-room, and also a small room
which has been used as a class-room for a number of youths
who were being trained for teachers. For some time the
work was carried on uninterfuptedly, and considerable
advance was made, especially in the educational department.
In 1877, however, Mr. Pickersgill was removed to form a
new mission at Mojanga, and we regret to say that Mr.
Peill has also been obliged to leave the district on account of
ill-health, so that at the present time Ambohibeloma and the
large district attached to it are without a resident mission-
ary. The accompanying statistics shew, to some extent, the
progress made in the district from 1875 to 1880:—

o| .| 2] a a| 3 ®).|/ 43 las 3°
Big/@] eldel no Bia) 2 loo Ss
as] ol]oo S 2 n A] Sp
Date. | &/8/%/ 2/52) § [Eo lS2/8|S lS] 22
r8) a q oe |G a Oey im O14 S me an
bles) E/Oe| = [<2 iRelg|s les] Bs
8| | a < F E re] Ss
; h Ss. a.
1870 |80] 3 | 2 |155|2038/11,480| ? ? |69/6527) ? 1155 9 4
1880 |80|31] 5 |221/2375/12,015 | 335 | 1585|77|3059|1786| 94 14 Oo
Increase] | 28) 3 | 66 | 337 | 535 | 335 |3585] 8 1786

Sixty new chapels have been built in the district since
1870, two of which are of sun-dried brick and the rest of clay.

Estimated population : 80,000.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 1795

10.— THE ANDOHALO DISTRICT.—Andohalo is the name of
the large open space in the centre of the city in which all the
principal kabary, or public assemblies, are held. The Ando-
halo, or rather the Avaratr’ Andohalo (north Andohalo),
church is situated at the north-east corner of this open
space. The church was formed in October, 1864, by a number
of Christians residing in the neighbourhood; and a small
temporary building was erected as a place of worship. The
congregation now assembles in a substantial wooden chapel,
which was erected by Mr. Pool with the help of friends in
England—one benevolent lady contributing the sum of £250
for this purpose. The first missionary who had charge of
this church was the Rev. R. G. Hartley, M.A. After Mr.
Hartley returned to England in 1868, the church was left
for a short time without any special European superinten-
dence. For about two years (1870—1872) the Rev. P. G.
Peake had charge of the church, after which it was placed under
the care of its present missionary, the Rev. H. W. Grainge.

The Andohalo. district is east of the Capital. In 1870,
and until the removal of Mr. Peake to Isoavina in 1872,
this district included the whole of what is now the Isoavina
district, and contained over thirty churches. When the
division of the district took place in 1872, the Andohalo church
was left with fewer outstations than any other church in the
Capital. This church, however, though comparatively small,
is composed of well-to-do people, who are not slow to take up
Christian work as they have opportunity. At one time they
supported a mission among the Sihanaka, and at the present
‘ time they have three mission stations in the Moramanga.
valley, at a distance of three days’ journey from the Capital,
which afford opportunity for the aggressive work of the
mother church. The smallness of the district has been, in
some respects, an advantage to the churches included in it,
inasmuch as the missionary has been able to visit them more
frequently, and to exercise over them a closer supervision than
is possible in the larger districts.

The following are the statistics of the Andohalo district,
including also those of the Isoavina district which was
attached to Andohalo in 1870 :—
176 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

o| «| "1 D 3 ol. . Le] a
eig}2| 8/88) § jgf)eel4) g ss) BB
Date. //3// S(2e| 3 jesl2el3|s |Se| 22
BIS |S} 2/08) 3 \<e/FalZ| so |§e| gs
8) FU"| | * | 4 3 a| 53
4 5.4,
1870 |31| 8 | ? |128/1754] 9645 | 970| ? |22] oq2| ? | 267 9 11h
1880
Ando-
halo. 16/17] 3 |161/3313| 5763 |1126) 1122/10] 723 | 417 | 145 4 0
1880 ,
Isoavina] 37| 9 | 9 |113|1923| 5822 | 757 |1407/31/1413|1240| 94 I Io
Increase} 22 | 18| 12] 146} 3482] 1940 | 9133/2529] 19/1193 | 1657

Seven new chapels have been built in the Andohalo district
since 1870, of which five are of sun-dried brick and two of

clay.
Estimated population: 30,000.

11.—THE ISOAVINA DISTRICT.—Isoavina is a moderately
sized town, about fifteen miles east of Antananarivo. There
are several villages in the neighbourhood, which join with
Isoavina in mission work, so that when all the people are
assembled there is a large Sunday congregation. Isoavina
became a mission stationin 1872. The new district was formed
from the eastern portion of the Andohalo district. The Rev.
P. G. Peake has had charge of it from the commencement, .
though at the present time he is absent on furlough. Since the
missionary settled in the district, a good mission house, a
suitable school-room, and a beautiful model church, have
been erected at Isoavina. In other parts of the district also
encouraging results are to be found, though the people, as a
whole, are very ignorant and superstitious, and the mission-
ary has had many difficulties to contend with, and much to
try his patience, in the indifference and stolidity of the people.
There are now several earnest evangelists stationed in the
district, supported chiefly by the Society; and also one at
Isoavina supported by the Palace Church. In the absence
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 177
of Mr. Peake, the district is again associated with Andohalo,
and is under the superintendence of Mr. Grainge.

The following statistics shew the numerical progress in the
district from its formation in 1872 to the present time :—

-|2) ¢ 3) 3 a; . ; zg 2
le|g/2] Sieg] s l2t/efl4/ 8 |es) 32
Date. | &/$/S) 3/54) & [sole8l8isiso| 28
% | 00) 9 2's o lor 2a coisas .
Eisie| Si65| 4 leojaei3s]/ 3 is5| 8S
Blas | Og 9s [<g/Pe)a/ 3 Os) gs
ic} Q < Ci z 3 bn
O a Bj
5. a.
1872 |14/ 0] ?| 37] 95215523] 115] ? | 15 | 542] 193} 72 0 O
1880 |37| 9 | 9 | 113] 1923|5822| 757 | 1407] 31 | 1413/1240] 94 1 10
Increase|23/ 9] 9 | 76] 971] 299] 642 |1407| 16 | 871 }1047| 22 1 Io

Twenty new chapels have been built in the district since
1872, of which one is of sun-dried brick and the rest of clay.

Estimated population: 36,000.

12,.-_THE FARAVOHITRA DISTRICT.—The word Faravohitra
signifies the “last village,” and is the name of the northern sub-
urb of Antananarivo, and the extreme north of the hill on which
the city stands. It is considered to be the healthiest suburb
of the Capital, and is that in which most of the Europeans re-
side. Twelveor fifteen years ago, there were but very few houses
at Faravohitra, and it was noted as the chief resort of thieves
and robbers. It was also one of the places where executions
frequently took place, and where the dead bodies of prisoners
were thrown away and left to be devoured by dogs. Now ~
all this has passed away, and this “last village’ has become
the most fashionable part of Antananarivo. There are many
large and respectable-looking houses there; the L. M. S.
College and Normal School buildings, and the Friends’ Girls’
School are at Faravohitra; and at the extreme north of the
hill stands the Children’s Memorial Church. This Church
was erected by means of the pence and halfpence of English
178 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION...

children, and in memory of the four nobles (noble by birth,
but still more noble on account of their faithful confession of
the Saviour) who were burned to death there on the 28th of
March, 1849. This building occupies a conspicuous position,
and is one of the first objects seen by the traveller as he
approaches the Capital from the east.

The church at Faravohitra’ was commenced in 1868, and
for a time assembled in a building erected for its temporary
use as a place of worship, but intended ultimately for a
school-room, to which purpose it is now applied. The
Memorial Church was opened on the 15th of September, 1870.
This event was referred to in our last ten years’ Review. The
first missionary in charge was the Rev. J. Pearse. After
Mr. Pearse, the Rev. J. Wills took charge of the church.
Latterly it has been associated with the College, and for a
time was under the care of the Rev. R. Toy. It is now
being transferred to the care of the Rev. J. Peill, who has
succeeded Mr. Toy as one of the tutors at the College.

The district associated with the Faravohitra church lies
north-east of the Capital. It is much smaller than many of the
other districts, being very narrow, though it extends toa con-
siderable distance, and includes some interesting outstations
on the borders of the forest. The statistics are as follows :—

o| .|2) 4 5 a . . §2
Sigi2\/S/e8| & |eeigeié) 4/88) 82
Date. | %/# || | 52| 5 |Seleeis| § Se) 28
Bieis|s|O8| S$ [<2 (A218) 8 Ge] za
FI Sle | a) & 3 n a] 83
3° w r} z Go Ou
1S) Gl &
Ss. a.
1870 |18/12| ?| 69] 1032 | 7830) 526} ? |16| 760) ? j114 2 8
1880 |27/ 20] 4 | 185] 3657 |10,046| 1667 | 2078) 27| 1388 | 959 | 139 17 0
Increase] 9] 8] 4 |116) 2625 | 2216] 1141 |2078|11| 628|959| 25 14 4

Seventeen new chapels have been built in the district since
1870, of which ten are of sun-dried brick and seven of clay.

Estimated population: 25,000,
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 179

13.—THE AMBOHIMANGA DISTRICT.—Ambohimanga is the
ancient capital of Imerina, and is situated about twelve miles
north of Antananarivo. Repeated reference has been made to
this royal city in the former part of this Review, and it is not
necessary to enlarge on the subject here. This has been one of
the strongholds of idolatry, and the people are still very super-
stitious, and intensely conservative of many of their ancieht
customs; but the Gospel has made its way among them, and has
proved itself to be the power of God. There are three churches
at Ambohimanga, which may beregarded as the mother churches
of the district, though they do not give all the help to the |
weaker churches which might reasonably be expected from
them. In addition’to these, fhere is a large church at Imeri-
tsiafindra, in the immediate neighbourhood of Ambohimanga,
which is equal in importance to the town churches, and
demands a fair share of the missionary’s attention.

The churches at Ambohimanga and in the district were
formerly connected with the church at Ambatonakanga,
‘and were superintended by the missionary in charge of that
church. In 1870, however, Ambohimanga was constituted
an independent mission station with a district containing
about a dozen country churches. The Rev. J. Sibree was
at that time appointed to this important station, and con-
tinued in charge till 1876. The Rev. J. Wills succeeded Mr.
Sibree, and laboured in the district until his return to England
on furlough in the early part of the present year (1880). The
Rev. C. F. Moss has the temporary charge of the district during
Mr. Wills’s absence, and it has thus for a time resumed,
to some extent, its former connection with Ambatonakanga.
One of the Palace Church evangelists appointed in 1874,
-has laboured at Ambohimanga with great success; and
on his removal in 1879, another student from the College
was stationed there. There are also several other evan-
gelists at work in the district, three of whom have had a
special training in the College. Each of these presides over a
group of churches, and conducts classes for the preachers and
adult members of the congregations. They also superintend
the schools, in which work they are assisted by teachers
from the Normal School. The following are the statistics :—
180 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

a a}e| . : rd 2 rd o$
Sla/2/Sle¢) $ ieSloel/¢] # |es) SB
rm] % Zslal?e oO |aRI|e gq |"O 3 qt 33
Date. | ©) 2/&/o|/S52/ 5 [Bolssio| 3s iSs| 28
b/g |s|/ 2/68) 4 <2 /@4/3| 3 |Bs| $s
S. a.
1870 | 14] 4 | ? | 34] 912/4926! 395] @ |13] 417; ? | 111 6 6
1880 | 23 | 21| 7 | 92 |2847|6839| 1081] 1147] 21/1163] 757] 123 6 1
Increase] 9°| 17] 7 | 58}1935/1913| 686]1147| 8 | 746/757] 311 19 7

Thirteen new chapels have been built in the district since
1870, of which nine are of sun-dried brick and four of clay.

Estimated population: 25,000.

14.—THE VONIZONGO DISTRICT.—Vonizongo is a large dis-
trict in the north-west of Imerina. Churches have existed there
from the time of the persecution, and several of the martyrs,
who were put to death in Antananarivo, were from Vonizongo.
Previous to 1870, Vonizongo was regarded as a general
mission district, and was visited periodically by the mission-
aries in Antananarivo. The churches greatly appreciated
these visits, but they were anxious to have a missionary resident
among them, and sent repeated requests to the Directors that
one might be set apart for this purpose. In response to these
requests, the Rev. T. T. Matthews was sent out in 1870 with a
special appointment for Vonizongo, and in the following year
he took up his residence at Fihaonana, one of the principal
towns in the district. A short time after this, the Rev. E. H.
Stribling was also appointed to Vonizongo. For a time the
two missionaries resided within a short distance of each other,
and worked the district from the same point. In 1874, however,
a more distinct division was made, and a new mission
station was formed at Fiarenana, in West Vonizongo, which
was placed under the care of Mr. Stribling, whilst Mr.
Matthews remained at Fihaonana and took charge of the
eastern division. From that time till now, Vonizongo has
been worked as two separate mission districts, but arrange-
ments have been recently made by which the two districts
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 181

are to be reunited, and placed under the sole superintendence
of Mr. Stribling, who will reside chiefly at Fihaonana,
where a large ‘house, a model chapel, and suitable school-
buildings have been erected for the use of the Mission. The
following are the statistics of the united district :—

Date.

Congregations.
Pastors.
Evangelists.
Preachers.

~ Church
members.
Adherents.
Adults
able to read.
Bibles
and Testaments,
Schools.
Scholars.
Children
able to read.

Contributions
* | for all purposes,

° 8

thy

-_

oO
&
o°?

660) ?

nn
8
~v
&
&

1870 | 87/32] ? |167 21,000

ol
-_
ay
°o

1880 | 104/95| 5 | 2141/1599] 14,922 | 2322/3149] 73 | 2602] 2705|206 15 1

Increase] 17/63] 5 | 44] 459 1722) 3149|51|1942/2705| 14 15 I

Eighty-one new chapels have been built in Vonizongo since
1870, four of which are of sun-dried brick and the rest of clay..

Estimated population : 125,000.

Following the plans of work which have been adopted in
Imerina, the missionaries in charge of the Betsileo Mission
have also divided the province into a number of missionary
districts. There are now six districts in connection with that
Mission, though some of these are united under the care of
one missionary. Each of the three town churches in Fiana-
rantsoa has a district associated with it, and these are usually
in the charge of the missionary, or missionaries, stationed
in the town. In addition to these, there are three other —
districts under the superintendence of missionaries residing
in the country. These are (1) the Ambositra district, which
is in the charge of the Rev. T. Brockway ; (2) the North-west
Isandra and Avaradrano district, in the charge of the Rev.
C. T. Price; and (3) the Ambohimandroso, or South Iarindrano,
district, in the charge of the Rev. T. Rowlands. The districts
of the Betsileo Mission are not shewn in the accompanying
Map, which has reference to Imerina only.
182 . ‘THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

CHAPTER VI.

EDUCATION.
i ,

N no department of mission work has there been such
decided advance, during the last ten years, as in the
Educational department. Previous to 1870, the efforts of the
missionaries had been chiefly confined to the building up of
churches, and the dissemination of religious knowledge, by
means of preaching and Bible-class instruction. General
education, though not neglected, did not, at that time, receive
the same amount of attention as has been given to it during
the last decade. This was not the consequence of an inade-
quate appreciation of the advantages of education, but was
the unavoidable result of social and political circumstances.
Whilst the missionaries had perfect liberty to conduct
religious services and to hold Bible and other classes in the
churches already established, there were difficulties in the
way of a more general education. It was not till after the
accession of the present Queen that the missionaries felt free
to commence some of the higher and most useful educational
institutions that now exist in the Capital; and it was not till
after the same event that elementary education became
generally practicable in the country. The Mission College
for the training of native pastors and evangelists was com-
menced as soon as circumstances would allow, but that was
not till the middle of 1869, and it was not fairly established
till the beginning of 1870. The Normal School did not attain
to its present character as a training institution for teachers
till about the same time, though it had previously existed as
a general and central school. The Girls’ Central School, and
other educational institutions in the Capital, have also been
begun since that time. Of the 359 elementary schools that
were in existence at the close of 1870, 331 had been begun
since 1868, and after the beginning. of the present reign.
The number of elementary schools in connection with the
Mission at the present time is 860. It will be seen therefore
that nearly all the results of educational work which are
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. | "783

presented in this Review may be regarded as the fruits of the
last ten years’ (or more correctly perhaps, of the last twelve
years’) labours in this department.

1.—EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS IN ANTANANARIVO.—At
the head of all our educational institutions stands the
COLLEGE. It was commenced in 1869, simply as a Theological
Institution for the training of native pastors and evangelists.
In 1876, however, it was enlarged into a General College,
having a secular as well as a theological department. Since
its establishment, one hundred and nine ministerial students
have been trained and sent forth, of whom seventy-seven are
now labouring in connection with the Mission, in addition to
ten others, who, after six years faithful service as evangelists,
have been called to occupy important positions in the Govern-
ment. Thirteen secular students also finished their course of
study at the close of last session, and are to be employed in
the service of the State. The following historical account of
. the College, by the REv. G. COUSINS, one of the tutors, will
be read with interest :—

In reviewing the history of this institution during the past
ten years, one has the advantage of dealing with a limited
well-defined branch of the Society’s work, whose existence,
moreover, is almost exactly coeval with the period under
review. On the other hand, there is but little room for
enthusiastic writing, and the outline to be given is of a
somewhat dry and sober character. Incidents of a startling
and thrilling kind must be sought elsewhere : here the reader
must fain be content with plain and simple facts. For con-
venience sake it may be well to treat these under the following
heads: (a) origin, (6) growth and development, (c) method,
(@) teaching staff, (e) work accomplished, and (/) finally,
present position.

1. Origin.—The College, at first called the L. M. S.
Theological Institution, was commenced in April, 1869. It
was established for the sole purpose of meeting a felt want.
This is sometimes overlooked now; but it is difficult to see
how the Society’s Mission in Madagascar could have become
consolidated and permanent unless steps had been taken to
meet that want. The Mission had been re-established seven
years ; the missionaries had acquired a good knowledge of
the vernacular, and were more than fully occupied in teaching
184 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

and preaching, both in town and country; and the whole of
Imerina, to say nothing of towns in distant provinces, had
become nominally Christian. What could a few Europeans
do in ministering to upwards of six hundred congregations,
most of which had sprung up almost ina day? If the thou-
sands who were gathering together were to hear the Word of
God, if they were to learn the way of life, it was evident that
their own countrymen must in nine cases out of ten be their
instructors. And well might the friends of Madagascar
rejoice and thank God that there was no lack of native
helpers. The readiness of the Malagasy to become teachers
and preachers was one of the most hopeful signs of strength.
When the College was started, there were more than two
hundred native pastors and eighteen hundred local preachers,
and to these two thousand Malagasy most of the preaching
was necessarily left. They did their best ; their best, however,
was but poor. Many were but indifferent readers ; few could
write well, and the majority not at all; while their attain-
ments in what are called the rudiments of education such as
. Arithmetic, Grammar, and Geography were far behind those
of a large number of the children in our schools at the present
time. Some of the young men in Antananarivo had, it is
true, a fair knowledge of the Bible: the result of their dili-
gence in attending the various classes held by the missionaries
for their benefit ; but they felt themselves at a disadvantage,
yet capable of greater things, and longed for fuller teach-
ing. The more closely they were brought into contact with
the missionaries the more they became aware of their own
deficiencies. The churches too were often in great difficul-
ties. In those days, pastors and preachers alike were liable
to be sent hither and thither on government service; and at
that time the words “government service’ were very elastic,
and were made to include all the private business of almost
every official of high rank. | Consequently, no one could tell
what the next Sunday would bring forth; and a church might at
a week’s notice, or less, find itself without pastor or preacher,
those who had hitherto. filled these posts having been sent
to a distant part of the island. One and all recognised the
need of a more permanent, more efficient, and more reliable
organisation. With a Christian sovereign upon the throne,
and with a fair supply of candidates suitable for the work,
both the Directors at home and their representatives in Mada-
' gascar thought that the time had come to bestir themselves.
At the Six-Monthly Meeting, held at Ambatonakanga early
in 1869, the matter was introduced and discussed. The
proposal to provide systematic instruction for the preachers
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 185

was joyfully welcomed; and as the result of that meeting
thirty-five of the best preachers of the Capital and neigh-
bourhood were accepted on probation, and, in the following
- April, a beginning was made.

2. Growth and development.—In these there have been
three distinct stages. First of all, as a preliminary and
tentative measure, Messrs. Toy and G. Cousins were requested
by their brethren to hold special classes for the candidates
who had come forward, and during the ensuing six months
to test the possibility of systematically training native
ministers. The action of the Government greatly facilitated
this possibility, for all the young men who were received
by the Committee were at once released from other duties
by His Excellency the Prime Minister and Her Majesty
the Queen. That was one great step in the right direction ;
nor has the friendly interest in the work of the College,
then shewn by the sovereign and her illustrious minister,
ever ceased: they have invariably done their best to help
and foster the institution. The classes met regularly four
mornings a week, and after six months the progress of
the students was ascertained by means of a written examina-
tion. On the whole, there was much to encourage both the
missionaries and their pupils. The District Committee there-
fore felt justified in going farther, and determined forthwith
to found a theological training college. Rules of manage-
ment, the course of study to be’ followed, and other details
were settled, and the Directors were asked to appoint as
tutors the two brethren who had conducted the preliminary
classes. In January, 1870, the College was definitely estab-
lished, and a second stage of progress had been reached.
Unfortunately, before many weeks of the new session had
passed Mr. Toy’s health completely broke down, and he
was ordered home to recruit his wasted strength. He was
absent for three years; but his lack of service was supplied
as far possible by the brethren stationed in the Capital, and
the work went quietly on. In 1873 Mr. Toy returned and
resumed his place. Then came the visit of the lamented late
Foreign Secretary of the Society and his colleague as a
deputation from the Directors. A conference of all the
missionaries of the L. M. S. and F. F. M. A. was called by
Dr. Mullens and Mr. Pillans, and all branches of work were
freely and fully considered. As one of the results of that
conference it was determined to extend if possible the useful-
ness of the College: the theological institution was to be
developed into a general college, which, whilst continuing
186 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

its special mission of training evangelists and pastors,
should also provide a higher education for young men of
the better class. A series of resolutions and a detailed
scheme embodying this determination were adopted by the
District Committee and approved of by the Directors as early
as 1874, but it was not until 1876 that the resolutions were
put in force. Since then, however, both ministerial and
secular students have been received annually, the latter
becoming almost as numerous as the former. A fourth
stage of development is near at hand, but cannot be included
in the review. The Society is erecting a noble building
for the College on a prominent site at Faravohitra, and
entrance there ought to be marked by yet further progress
and success. Hitherto the work has been carried on in mere
sheds, for the first five years at Andohalo, and for the last —
five at Faravohitra, immediately below the site of the new
building. ,

3. Afethod.—New students are received annually in July.
Only young men of decided Christian character, who are
church members and have already manifested zeal and
fitness for Christian work, who are recommended by the
missionary from whose district they come, and are further
recommended by the native church to which they belong,
are considered eligible as ministerial students; but any
respectable youth of suitable age and ability, coming with
the recommendation of a missionary, can apply for admission
as a secular student. They all have to submit to an examin-
ation previous to admission : the examination of the ministerial
students including Reading, Writing, the first four rules of
Arithmetic, simple and compound, the parts of speech, the
leading geographical definitions and the positions of the
continents and oceans, general questions in Scripture, and a
translation of Picton’s Catechism on the Four Gospels; that
of the seculars, Reading, Writing, Arithmetic to Simple
Proportion, the elements of Grammar and Geography, and
the first English Lesson-book. All who successfully pass
this written examination ‘are brought before the District
Committee, one by one, and accepted or otherwise by the
vote of the Committee. Those who are accepted then enter
the College on probation, the probation lasting twelve months.

The length of the course is four years for ministerial
students, and three for seculars. The subjects of study for all
alike are Grammar, Geography, general and physical, Arith-
metic, Algebra, Euclid, Logic, simple lessons in Mental and
Moral Philosophy, the English language, and Old and New
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. ' 187

Testament History. Besides these more general subjects, the
candidates for the ministry are taught Historical, Dogmatic,
and Exegetical Theology, Church History, and Homiletics ;
whilst the secular students study ancient and modern History,
and the elements of Physical Science, besides paying more
attention to the English language. The whole course of
tuition has gradually become systematised, and now each
session has its appropriate studies. The College year,
running from July to June, is divided into two equal terms
of twenty weeks, each term concluding with a written exam-
ination in all the subjects taught; and the examination at
the close of the second term is made to cover the work of the
entire year. Prizes are given at these examinations. An
annual meeting of missionaries, old students, and students
still in the College, pleasantly ends the year.

No students live on the premises, nor does the Society
undertake their full support. The books used by the minis-
terial students, however, are supplied gratis; and a monthly
allowance (varying from 2/- to 4/-) is made towards their
maintenance. Seeing that most of them are married, and
many have children, this sum is none too large, but it
would not be wise to increase it. The secular students buy.
their own books and support themselves.

4. Teaching staf.—As already indicated, the District Com-
mittee appointed two of their number to act as tutors, and
upon them the chief burden of teaching and general responsi-
bility have of course fallen. But others have rendered very
great assistance. On the failure of Mr. Toy’s health, the
Revs. W. E. Cousins, J. Pearse, B. Briggs, and J. Richard-
son divided his work among them. The first two continued
their services until Mr. Toy’s return in 1873, as did Mr.
Briggs until he too had to leave for England. Mr. Barker,
the Revs. J. Wills and W. Montgomery, and Dr. Mackie
also kindly undertook various classes. In 1874-1876
the Rev. G. Cousins was in England on furlough, and
during his absence the Rev. J. A. Houlder was associated
with the Rev. R. Toy as tutor. Last year again, the health
of Mr. Toy having once more broken down, the Revs. B..
Briggs, J. Pearse (who was in Imerina on a visit), C. F.
Moss, and Messrs. Thorne and Lord, notwithstanding the
pressure of other duties, cheerfully gave as much of their
time as possible to the work of the College. It should also
be stated that for several years the Rev. J. Richardson gave
the students instruction in singing, and latterly in school
management too.
188 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

At the conference referred to above, it was decided to make
use of native assistants, so as to relieve the tutors of part of
their duties with the junior students, and the plan was
carried out. Mr. Frank Rasoamanana, a’'young man who was
educated in England by the Friends, was the first assistant ;
but his services being required for the F. F.M. A. school, he
left, to be succeeded by Rasoamiaramanana, his former
companion in England, and who also subsequently left to
' work for the F. F. M. A. There are now two assistants, both of
them being young men who had passed through the College
as students before receiving their present appointments.

All hope of Mr. Toy’s return to Madagascar having been

relinquished, and the claims of the work being urgent, the
District Committee at. its last meeting invited the Rev. J.
Peill to undertake the duties of second tutor, a request to
which he acceded. The teaching staff therefore now consists
of the Revs. G. Cousins and J. Peill, assisted by Radaniela
and Andriambalo. Before that last appointment had been
made, though at the time still unknown to his old fellow-
labourers, Mr. Toy had been summoned from the life of toil
on earth to rest in heaven. In another part of this Review
his death has been recorded ; but since his work at the College
was his great and his best-loved service for the Master in
Madagascar, one cannot but dwell on it afresh. The College
has lost an able, zealous, and earnest-minded tutor, a most
devoted friend and helper. His passionate enthusiastic
love of teaching, his unswerving fidelity to duty in spite of
much bodily weakness, his conscientious, painstaking, and
self-denying spirit can never be forgotten by his colleagues
and old pupils. “Though dead he yet speaks” to his survivors,
and for many years to come it will be found that “his works
do follow him.”

5. Work accomplished.—The results of ten years’ steady
effort are both direct and indirect, special and general.
Perhaps the subjoined summary will best illustrate the
former, the most important fact being that one hundred and
nine ministerial students have been trained and sent forth,
and that of those seventy-seven are usefully and faithfully
labouring in the Lord’s service; whilst ten others, though
called to leave their posts as evangelists, had betore their .
recall spent six years in very successful work, and still fre-
quently preach. The first secular students left the College
‘only a few weeks since, and it is gratifying to know that the
Prime Minister is intending to employ them in the service of
the State.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 189

Summary of College statistics, 1870-1880.
Minist. — See. Total.

Admissions ......... esse ceeees 182 33 215
Rejected after probation......., 19 2 ar
Expelled, or allowed to leave.... 25 7 32 \
Still in the College...... pec eeees 29 Ir 40
Sent out at end of course ..... + 109 13 122

— 215

AS

Further details concerning the ministerial students who have com-
pleted their course.

Dead ......00 .000- ween Ceo eere se cees we eces Conece 6
Joined the S. P. G. woe. eee ee cee tees cee teens 5
Relinquished the work ...... Seseees see cence eneees 4
Incapacitated, or waiting for appointments .......... 7
Taken for government service..... vec ceeessesreceee 10

Still in active work :—

(@) As pastors ..cccecececeucee cvcevevees 6
(2) As evangelists in Imerina . ae eee coeceee 52
(¢) As evangelists in distant provinces. seeecee 17
(d) As assistants in the College ............ 2 77

109

The good effected by the College indirectly is more difficult
to tabulate, but none the less real. It is to be seen for
‘example in the marked improvement in native preaching.
Malagasy preachers have still much to learn, and in spiritual
insight, high tone, and moral force are often sadly deficient ;
but in matter, breadth of thought, arrangement, style, and
delivery, there are many acceptable and efficient preachers.
In chese respects, there no longer exists the great difference
between the European and the native that formerly was
so striking. To the College this is in no slight measure
due. Again, in common with other institutions, notably
the Normal School and the Friends’ Boys’ School at
Ambohijatovo, , the College has given a great impetus
to education. Its aims have been high; its standard
constantly though gradually rising ; its system on,the whole
thorough ; and its students a recognised power in the land.
The fruits of all this have often been seen in a spirit of earn-
est emulation, an endeavour to do likewise, and in strenuous -
efforts on the part of young men to qualify themselves for
admission. Once more, the work at the College has added not
a little to the native literature. Among the books printed for
its use, in addition to commentaries and various publications
190 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

on Biblical subjects, may be mentioned a treatise on Logze,
another on Astronomy, a third and much larger one on
Physical Geography, a large Grammar, an Analysts, a Euchd,
and /estortes of Greece, Rome (in the press), and England.
Other books are in preparation, and will in due time be
published. These are some of the “branches running over

the wall.”

6. Present posttion.—Briefly expressed it is this: first
difficulties have been surmounted and a vantage - ground
secured for future usefulness. The tutors and those who have
assisted them have had an uphill struggle. Beginning
without text-books, at a time when the educational works
were of a most elementary kind, and so few that they
could be counted on one’s fingers, the demands upon their
time and strength have been very great; and many, many
a weary hour have they spent at the study table writing
lectures for their classes. Of course writing is still necessary,
and will be; but as there are some five and twenty printed
manuals used in the College to-day, not one of which was in
existence ten years ago, it will at once be seen that a great
change has taken place. The students, moreover, spend far
less time in transcribing lectures and get through much more
actual study. Experience also has been gained, both from
failures and from successes. The mental power of the Mala-
gasy, the best methods ofinstructing them, their ability, or
otherwise, to make use of what they acquire, and many such
matters could only be guaged and tested by time and expe-
rience. The object of the College is also better understood.
Many who at first flocked in had but dim ideas of what they
were about—a general wish to gain knowledge being perhaps
the most powerful motive. Even those whose motives were
higher had to “walk by faith, not by sight.” But when it was
discovered that the after-work of a student is more trying
than his studies, that no life of ease and honour awaits him at
the close of his student career, but that steady, persistent
work, not to say drudgery, is expected of him, and that he
must be willing to leave home and friends to settle elsewhere,
the haze began to float away and all to become clear; and
it is only right to state that candidates who now seek admis-
sion to the College as ministerial students are, as a rule, of a
lower social standing than those who first applied. Yet still
the applicants come, and that with a distinct understanding
that after four years of student life they may be asked to leave
Imerina for some distant part of the island; whilst such
as seek knowledge for its own sake, or for their personal
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 191

advantage only, can by a little self-denial obtain it as secular
students. Again, it is an encouraging sign that the College
stands high in the estimation of the Malagasy. Its child-
hood is giving way to manhood, or at any rate to lusty youth ;
and as a powerful agent for good, whose first laurels have
been gained, the College should in coming years fully realise
the fair promise of its days.

But much remains to be done by the friends and Directors
of the Society, whose offspring it is, if such hopes are to be
fulfilled. It has been satisfactorily proved that educated
Malagasy teachers are capable of taking a prominent part in
the evangelisation and enlightenment of their country; and
that with their aid the glorious work entrusted to the Society’s
missionaries in Madagascar will become more consolidated
and thorough, and the semi-heathenism and merely nominal
acceptance of Christianity yield to something nobler and
better. In Antananarivo the pastors occupy a most important
position, and into their hands the superintendence of the city
churches is passing more and more: the missionaries keep-
ing to a large extent in the background as counsellors
and guides, and their native colleagues carrying out the
details. Several of these pastors further assist the missionary
in the management of the large districts and outstations
connected with the city churches ; and their influence in the
districts is great. The majority of the evangelists in the
country stations also shew themselves trustworthy and
efficient co-workers. They are in full sympathy with the
missionary, intelligently enter into his plans, and are able to -
work on the right lines; but they need guidance. It must
not be supposed that with these native agents in the field the
necessity for maintaining a strong body of missionaries ceases.
Two or three years ago, a reduction of our number was
possible without injury to the Mission; but the reduction has
been so rapid since, that palpable weakness is the conse-
quence. Every year shews that the European missionary, with
his wider culture, his more enlightened conscience, his
higher standard, his greater energy, and his fuller
consecration, is needed, if the Mission is to prosper.
There must be retrogression unless the native agents
are wisely and constantly superintended. Let there be
no hesitation on this point, or serious mistakes will be
made. Here in Madagascar, missionaries, native pastors,
and evangelists, alike know this to be the case; and one
earnestly hopes that it will be understood and accepted at
home.
192 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

Nor can the question of funds be ignored. The day is yet
distant when the native churches generally will be able or
willing to support their pastors. Those in Antananarivo do
so; but the people in the country are with a few exceptions
too poor, and where not too poor are too indifferent, to
attempt this. They find it taxes their strength to the
utmost to build their own places of worship and provide the
greater portion of the school-teacher’s salary. As one result
of this, very few students become pastors. They are nearly
. all employed as evangelists in charge of small groups of
outstations, most of them being dependent on the Society for
their support. Rice and a house to live in are given by the
people; but the money has to be found elsewhere. The
Palace Church maintains about a dozen evangelists, the
home missionary society some four or five more, and the city
churches partly support others; but the grant in aid from the
Directors, supplemented by private funds at the disposal of
the missionaries, is the chief source of supply. This also
must be borne in mind. Not that their number is to be
indefinitely increased and the demands upon the Society
constantly enlarged ; but that the same liberality which the
Directors have exercised in the past may be continued, at
any rate for some years to come. No missionary society
represented in this island expects so much from its adherents
as the L. M.S.; nor does any society do so much for the
island. Still there is a danger of expecting too much. To foster
healthy self-reliance must ever be the aim; at the same time
there must be patience in waiting for the fruits of toil, and an
unfailing readiness to help with no grudging hand. Gratefully
acknowledging’ then the tokens of God’s presence and blessing
in what has already been done, responding heartily and
‘ loyally to His call to persevere in what we have undertaken
in His name, let us gird up our loins for fresh efforts, and,
'in humble dependence upon Him, strive to outdistance
in the next ten years the progress made in the past.

The Educational Institution in Antananarivo which takes
rank next to the College is the NORMAL SCHOOL. One
hundred and twenty youths have already completed their
course of training in this institution, most of whom are now
engaged in teaching. There are also twenty-seven more
who will complete their studies at the close of the present
‘year. ' The following account of the School has been supplied
by Mr. J. C. THORNE, who, in the absence of Mr. Richardson
in England, has charge of the institution :—
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 193

Among the missionaries sent out by the Society on the re-
establishment of the Mission, in 1862, was Mr. C. Stagg, a
schoolmaster. Under his superintendence a school was
apened at Ambodin’ Andohalo, on the spot where a central
school was first formed by Messrs. Jones and Griffiths, in con-
formity with the express wish of Radama I., in March, 1824.
The site was given by the king for this purpose.

After but a short period of earnest and zealous work in this
school, some of the living fruits of which are still known to
us and esteemed by us, Mr. Stagg succumbed to repeated
attacks of Malagasy fever on February 5, 1864.

The school was then carried on by native teachers,
who had received a little training, with the occasional
superintendence of some of the missionaries, until charge of
it was kindly undertaken towards the close of 1867 by Mr.
J.S. Sewell, of the F. F. M. A., who had recently arrived in
the island. Under his care the school made great progress.
In 1868, Mr. J. Barker, sent out by the Society to superin-
tend its educational operations, arrived in Antananarivo;
and in February, 1869, he entered upon the charge of the
Central School, Mr. Sewell having relinquished it for his
new establishment at Ambohijatovo. The work of the school
comprised at this time an early morning class for adults, a
general school, and a teachers’ class held at a convenient
hour for those engaged in instructing the congregational
schools.

A first and most important step towards the training of
teachers was taken in the following year, when the District
Committee decided to select from forty to sixty promising youths
for this purpose ; and from this date the school may be said to
have assumed the character of a normal institution for training
teachers, which is now its vazson d'etre. From the number of
youths so selected arose the name of E/fa-polo lahy (The
Forty}, by which designation the students in the Normal
School have ever since been known, and that notwithstanding
their ever varying and latterly greatly increased number. -

The wooden building in which the school had hitherto met
was removed in 1870 to give place to a brick building, which
in arrangement and construction should be better adapted
for the work.

The report for 1870 speaks of fifty-six normal students and
six native teachers. Mr. Barker’s other engagements in con-
ducting the Palace School, which had been lately formed, as
well as classes in the Theological Institution, together with
194 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

his frequent ill-health, combined to retard the progress of
what was his chief work. No one therefore could be surprised
that after Mr. Barker’s retirement early in 1872, and a
subsequent interval of several months, during which Messrs.
Brockway, Houlder, and Wills, all of whom had been but a
short time in the country, successively superintended the
school, very little advance had been made.

The Committee, however, was gratified in hearing in June,
1872, that the Directors had accepted the Rev. J. Richard-
son’s offer to leave his station at Fianarantsoa to undertake
the charge of the Normal School; and it at once expressed
its pleasure thereat, and requested Mr. Richardson to enter .
upon his new duties as soon as possible. Under new superin-
tendence the school was quickened into new life. It was
found that from various causes the number of students had
decreased to thirty-three, and the number of scholars in the
practising school to seventy. The new building was at
last completed, and for a short time provided sufficient
accommodation. In June, 1873, the Committee decided on
a standard of admission for the students, and early in 1874
fifteen were received after the usual six months’ probation
for the full course, ard other nineteen on probation. At
the same time twenty-four students received appointments
to schools. Two of them were for the Palace School, one
for the staff of the Normal School, ten were placed by the
Palace Church at the most important towns in Imerina, and
the remainder were settled in the various mission districts.
The numbers in the school had increased so much that in
October the Committee sought the sanction of the Directors
for the erection of a larger building on another site, and for
the occupation of the present building by the Girls’ Central
School, which was then held in very incommodious and
otherwise unsuitable premises. The need for better accommo-
dation loudly proclaimed itself in February, 1875, when
twenty-five additional students were received on probation
after having passed the entrance examination, and other
sixty from the Prime Minister also for training as teachers.
From the report for the year 1876 it appears that the numbers
in June stood thus :—

Government .............e00e0- ; . 60
Students...... L.M.S. ceccsseee ceveneeueeece 60
Total ‘ . 120
Scholars... .ccccccccesceec sce cee c cone cetecces cous 154
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 195

Throughout the years 1876 and 1877, the work of the school
was carried on under very disadvantageous circumstances, in
two, and sometimes three, different buildings at various
distances from each other. In December, 1876, a public
examination was held in the school, at which the Prime
Minister expressed himself as much pleased and surprised at
the progress the students had made ; he also gave the students
and scholars the sum of £8 for division among them. The
report for 1878 mentions Mr. Richardson’s absence for three
months on a mission tour to the south-west of Madagascar.
He found on his return that during his absence the native
teachers had done their work faithfully. In January of the
same year, the class-rooms of the new building at Faravohitra
were occupied by the normal students, and the standard for
the entrance examination was raised. After the examination in
March, forty-five additional students were received. The new
building was formally opened with a religious service on

- Saturday, September 7th, 1878. His Excellency the Prime
Minister was present, accompanied by some of the chief
officers and members of the Palace Church.

In order to set Mr. Richardson at liberty to take his fur-
lough in England, Mr. Thorne was desired by the Committee
in May, 1879, to transfer his services from the superintendence
of schools in Imerina to the Normal School. Under his tem-
porary charge the school has quite maintained its efficiency
and prestige.

Some of the results of ten years’ work.—One hundred and
twenty youths have at various times completed their course,
and most of these are at present actually engaged in teaching.
Although their average ability is probably below that of a
pupil-teacher of the third year in England, yet they are very
superior to the majority of untrained teachers, and as regards
intelligence, sobriety, and correctness of behaviour, most of
them are as lights in the little worlds in which they move. A
very fair proportion of them, after teaching for several years,
have sought admission to the College, where they are now
being prepared for further usefulness. Other thirty-seven
will complete their three years’ course in December next.
The schools under the care of these trained teachers have
made great improvement, to which the missionaries in whose
districts they have been situated, as well as those specially
engaged in superintending elementary education, have re-
peatedly borne their testimony.

The present posttion of the school.—The teaching staff
comprises the missionary in charge, three assistants and an
196 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

assistant-teacher of drawing for the Normal School, and two
assistants for the practising school. The complement of
teachers in the latter is made up by drafts from the normal
students, who have to teach a month at a time.

The numbers are as follows :—

Government..........es008 02 0 32

Students 11. M.S. .cceceesecsesce sess sees 63
Total...... 0.205 seaceeeee 95

Scholars 1... ......ceeeeeee ee ered eccesecees 176
Total ......c.. ec eens ceceee 271

The students are now twenty less in number than in 1879.
This decrease has been caused by the death of one student, the
appointment of another to Ambatondrazaka, and the enforced
withdrawal of nineteen on the ground of their irregular attend-
ance and incompetence. The retirement of these latter will tend
very much to the improvement of those who remain. In the
average attendance in the practising school there has been a
considerable increase during the year, and it now has more
scholars than the desk accommodation will provide for. The
following table clearly shews how wide is the area over
which the influence of the school is, and will be more increas-
ingly, felt :— . .

Students. Scholars.

From Antananarivo 8 30
» § miles and under 10 25

» 5 » to 10 38 . 56
1» 20 53,.57 30 6 25
»» over 30 miles 2 ; 5
95 176

During a recent journey in the winter vacation the writer
met one of the scholars at a place fifty miles north of the
Capital, and two others at another place sixty miles south.
A journey east and west would without doubt reveal similar
gratifying instances. In order properly to estimate the value
of these facts, it should be borne in mind that Madagascar is
destitute of any other mode of locomotion for our scholars
than that with which nature has provided them.

The GIRLS’ CENTRAL SCHOOL is also an institution of
great importance in Antananarivo. It was established in
1872 to meet a felt want in connection with female education.
The Friends’ Girls’ School, at Faravohitra, was in existence
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 197

before this, but left ample room for a second institution of a
similar kind, especially if established within the city. These
two schools work harmoniously together, and by no means
interfere with each other’s prosperity. The L. M. S. Girls’
School now occupies the school-room at Andohalo, originally
built for the Boys’ Normal School, and is conveniently situ-
ated for those girls in the town and about the Palace, who
prefer it to the more distant school at Faravohitra. For
the first four years this school was superintended by
Miss Cameron, Mrs. Richardson, and other ladies in the
Mission, who could spare time for the work. In 1876, Miss
BLISS was sent out by the Society to take the sole charge of

the school, and from her we have received the following
account of it :—

This School has been in operation nearly eight years, and
I have been here about half of that time. Neither of the
originators of this good work is in the island at present, so
I must draw mainly on my own memory of what has been
told me respecting its commencement,

its Origin.—It had long been felt necessary for some higher
education to be provided for girls and women than was given
them in the mixed elementary schools attached to each of
the town churches, and various classes had been conducted
by ladies of the Mission with a view to this end; but no
permanent work of this kind was begun until the year 1872.
In October of that year, Mrs. Richardson and Miss Cameron
determined to commence a school, the necessary funds for
which were derived from the sale of a box of garments sent
out from England; and help was also received in the shape
of school-furniture, books, etc. from Miss Gilpin and others.
Such was the beginning of the Girls’ Central School, which
with various fortunes and many fluctuations has, nevertheless,
with God’s help and blessing, held its own against all oppos-
ing circumstances.

Butldings.—In this respect the school has seen several
changes. It was first held in the two lower rooms of a native
house at Andohalo, but these were so small that it is really
wonderful to think that ninety girls were ever taught in
them, and on my arrival in July, 1876, I at once began to
seek better accommodation. No suitable house being found,
we erected a rush and timber building on some L. M. S.
198 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

ground near the Society’s Printing Office at Imarivolanitra.
This was paid for out of a liberal gift (£42 125. 2d.) sent by
some kind friend, or friends, at' Edgbaston. After the former
confined quarters, this “cow-shed with glass windows,” as it
was afterwards described, seemed a perfect palace of space
and cleanliness ; six months after it was finished, however,
a large wing had to be added as our increased numbers
needed more room. In these premises we remained for two
years, while the new Normal School for Boys was being built
at Faravohitra, and their old room in Andohalo prepared by
Mr. Pool for our use. We moved into it in October, 1878,
celebrating the important event by giving the pupils a grand
entertainment. The building is a very fine one, with two
class-rooms and a small sitting-room ; the main room being
large, lofty, well-lighted, and easily accommodating eight
classes. We have a good assortment of maps, pictures, and
illuminations (these last sent by E. Beveridge, Esq., of Dun-
fermline), which give the place a bright and cheerful appear-
ance; and when we have some new desks and forms, which
we are needing sadly, the furniture will be all that could
be desired.

Objects and Atms.—As stated above, this school was
intended to have a special work of its own, in being a kind
of finishing institution, giving a higher education than can
be obtained in the schools belonging to the several churches ;
and also it was hoped that girls could be trained to go out
as teachers into distant country villages. This latter plan,
however, has in a manner failed, the reasons of which will
be given below. Having the first object in view we refuse
to accept as pupils any who cannot read and write fairly
well, except in the very exceptional cases of girls and women
who have come up from the country, and do not properly
belong to any town congregation. We are always glad to
welcome these country people: otherwise, we prefer to have
those who have got to the top of their own schools, and are
thus well prepared to enter our second or third classes.
We make it a rule to receive no children from the town
schools, who do not bring a letter from their teacher, or the
missionary in charge of the church with which they are
connected. The same rule holds good, too, with regard to
Miss Gilpin’s school at Faravohitra, and she also will not
knowingly receive one of our pupils without a note from
me. By this means we avoid interfering with one another’s
work, of which there is always danger while the Malagasy
have such a love for change and novelty.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 199

Number and attendance.—On referring to the old registers
of attendance I find that the school was opened with about
sixty scholars, but in six months they had increased to one
hundred on the books, with an average attendance of ninety ;
this did not last long though, and at times they seem to have
been considerably fewer. The numbers taken each July since
T have been here are as follows :— ;

Date. On the books. In daily attendance.
July 1876 78 60
» 1877 116 104
1, 1878 134° 116
» 1879 154 135
1 1880 152. 130

It should be stated perhaps that, in counting the names on the
registers, only those scholars who have been present during the
previous fortnight are reckoned. There has been a decided
falling off in attendance during the last few months, owing to
a serious epidemic of influenza (which scarcely a child escaped
taking) and other interruptions. The regularity of some of
the girls is most pleasing, but it is chiefly found among the
members of the four upper classes; of these, many were not
absent once during the year ending last May, except during
the time of sickness above mentioned. It is our custom when
school closes for the winter holidays to give a garment to

. every child who has not been absent more than twice during
the twelve months then ending, and when we did so amonth
ago, sixty-five girls had earned them. The reason of the
lower classes being less regular than the others is that they
are composed mostly of little children and slaves: from the
former we can hardly expect the diligence shewn by their
elders, and the latter are always liable to be kept away to do
their master or mistress’s work.

Teaching-staf—Until the last year or two, in nothing has
the school seen more changes than with regard to teachers,
both European and Malagasy. As before stated it was com-
menced by Mrs. Richardson and Miss Cameron, and while
they were in charge of it, most of the ladies of the Mission,
and some of the gentlemen, seem at one time or another to
200 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

have helped them by taking classes. Owing to the death of
her father, Miss Cameron resigned her connection with the
school in October, 1875, and Mrs. Parrett soon after consented
to take the oversight of it until my arrival. She also
continued to help me for a long time, At different times
other friends have also given some help; and now Mrs,
Briggs and Mrs. Parrett have kindly relieved me of all care
of the sewing-classes, except a little of the fancy-work, a
labour of which nobody who has not had the same can have
any idea. By this valuable help I am not only released from
attending school in the two work afternoons, but the
fatigue of hours spent in cutting out garments and other
preparation is also saved me. Our Malagasy teachers at
present consist of three young men who were trained in the
Normal School; four girls, teachers of the younger classes,
who were formerly members of our own pupil-teachers’ class ;
and one elderly woman who was engaged when the school
first began. As observed in last year’s report, it may seem
strange that in a girls’ school there should be three young
men employed as teachers ; but there are no women outside
the school who are capable of teaching our advanced classes,
and of our own elder girls even there are none old enough to
take charge of them, so we are obliged to engage Normal
School students, or the school would suffer.

Hours of teaching.—Our morning hours are from 8°30 till
11 o'clock every day except Friday, when we keep on until
11°30, for thereis no school in the afternoon, that being the
great market-day. In the afternoon the pupils reassemble at
1:30. Halfan hour is then given to learning the different
catechisms; and at 2 o’clock the usual lessons begin on Monday
and Wednesday, while Tuesday and Thursday are the sewing
days; on the former, fancy work is taught (knitting, crochet,
wool-work etc.), and on the latter, plain sewing only. The
school is dismissed for the day at 3°30. Notwithstanding the
Friday half-holiday, Saturday has to be a whole holiday, in
order to give an opportunity for the weekly Jamba washing
and hair-dressing.

Examinations and Subjects taught.—The school has now
been examined four times since I have been here, three times
by Mr. Thorne, and last Christmas by Mr. Lord. The
examination usually lasts four or five days; and every year
it takes longer, as the younger classes take up more subjects
to be examined in. When Mr. Lord came last December
the work done was as follows :—
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 201

The eight classes were all tested in knowledge of the
Scriptures, Reading, Writing, Dictation, and Arithmetic ;
seven classes in Grammar and Geography; six in Mental
Arithmetic; three in English; and two in drawing. The
examination of the three higher classes was conducted by
means of written papers ; by the three next classes everything
was written upon slates; while the examination of the two
lowest classes was partly oral and partly written. Two
ladies also examined the girls in sewing. The following is
a tabulated form shewing the classes in which the pupils
have passed at each examination :—

Date. lrat classland class.|3rd class.| Failed. Not present Total.
Christmas 1876] 15 44 18 2 fo) 79

” 1877/42 36 25 2 3 108
March 1879] 53 52 29 I 3 138
Christmas 1879] 68 37 19 2 15 141

After the examinations, prizes are given to those who have
gained the highest number of marks in each subject. The
rewards consist of fancy articles from England when we have
any; and failing these, Bibles, hymn-books, and school-
books are given; but these are not appreciated so much as
work-boxes, writing cases, etc., are.

findrances.—These perhaps are not so numerous as they
are in some other countries. Our greatest trouble is probably
the same as that experienced in all eastern lands, viz., that
it is the custom for girls to be married while still very young:
for this reason we are constantly losing some of our best
scholars ; and this it is which prevents our getting teachers
old enough to take charge of our upper classes.

At the commencement of every year, a pupil-teachers’ class
is formed of fourteen of the oldest and most advanced girls.
These learn most of the time, but do some teaching as
practice, and some of them would doubtless in time make

* Passing Ist class means getting over % of the total of the marks allowed ;
and class over 4; 3rd class over }; and the failures are those who only
obtained some number under ¢ of the marks given.
202 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

good teachers; but our class is invariably much smaller at
the end of the year through so many girls having left to be
married. The original intention of training girls to go out
as teachers should never have been entertained ; for the idea
of a respectable single young woman going ‘to live away
from her own home is utterly foreign to Malagasy notions,
and could not be recommended by any one desirous of the
girl’s welfare. Ofcourse those who marry evangelists and
teachers should be qualified to help their husbands in
the village schools so far as their household duties will
permit; therefore I persevere with our “teachers’ class”:
otherwise, I should be tempted to give it up as a failure.
One of my most cherished plans has come to nought for the
want of the necessary funds to devote to such an object,
i.e., to bring up girls from far away villages and board them
with respectable families in the Capital, until they are fit to
return to their own homes as teachers. It might not answer,
but I should like to try it. Many men and boys come from
distant parts to attend the College and Normal School, and
these receive some pecuniary help towards defraying their
expenses while ‘in town; and surely some of their female
relations would be willing to come up to our school if like
help could be given them.

The Malagasy character, as a rule, lacks the power of
continued application, and many of the children find the
regular ‘routine of school work so irksome that they stay
away on the merest excuse, the funeral of a relation of some
remote degree, or other things as trifling, are made to serve
as reasons for stopping away. In this respect none of: our
pupils give more trouble than the girls from the Palace.
Two of these, the most closely connected with the Queen and
Prime Minister, I have not much fault to find with: they are
sent tolerably regularly ; but the others stay away for weeks
at a time, then one morning they are found in their places,
- and they make great promises of future regularity and dili-
gence, soon, however, to be broken. The greatest interrup-
tion we get is when the Queen goes to Ambohimanga for
change of air: so many of the officers and high people of
titeJand with their families accompany her, that, not unfre-
quently, more than one-third of our pupils are away; and if
Her Majesty’s stay in the country is a long one, many of the
girls know that they will have lost their places in class, and
despairing of ever gaining them again, they stop away alto-
gether, various excuses and promises of attendance being
given when enquiries are made, but we never see them again. ©
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 203

Another serious hindrance we have to contend with, is the
liking for change so prevalent here, which is the cause of
there being a constant stream of girls passing through the
school, who come out of mere curiosity, and stay a few days,
weeks, or months, as the case may be, then we see no more
of them. In the year ending last June we had 227 girls
altogether; whereas the greatest number on the registers
at one time was 159, and the highest number in attendance
140, while 121 have been from six months to nearly eight
years in the school.

Encouragements.—These are not by any means few, though
perhaps it will-not take much space to enumerate the princi-
pal ones. The girls generally possess good abilities, and are
‘docile and eager to learn ; and though there are some idle and
irregular ones to vex us, they are the exception, not the rule.
So, when considering the school, there are many more things
to be thankful for than to be troubled about. Even the fact
of losing so many pupils through marriage is not an unmiti-
gated evil, for it is satisfactory to know that these educated
girls are greatly sought after by the young men in «the
College, and those who are either teachers now, or are being
trained for such; and often when visiting former pupils in
their married homes my heart is rejoiced to see what staid
respectable young matrons and mothers they have become,
and at such times I feel that the work of the Girls’ Central
School is by no means thrown away, even though we do not
send out trained teachers. Surely it is something to render
girls more fit to make good wives, and sensible, educated
Christian mothers desirous of training their little ones
for God; and perhaps by this means the fruit of our labours
will be more seen in the future generation than it is at
present. :

THE PALACE SCHOOL; so called because of its having been ~
taught in one of the large rooms in the Palace, was com-
menced in 1870, and was placed under the superintendence of
Mr. Barker, who was, at that time, the missionary schoolmaster
in charge of the Normal School. When Mr. Barker left the
island, the Palace School was placed under the care of
Mr. Houlder, and since then Mr. Wills, Mr. Grainge, Mr.
Thorne, and Mr. Lord have each had a share in its
superintendence.* The management of this school, how-

* A resolution was passed at the last meeting of the District Committee
inviting Mr. Baron to take charge of this school.
204 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

ever, has never been entirely in the hands of the mission-
aries, except in the teaching department. The school
was commenced at the wish of the Prime Minister. He
appointed the scholars, and all admissions, removals, and
cases of discipline have to be submitted to him. There has,
however, never been any difficulty in the management of the
school arising from this arrangement, as the Prime Minister
has always supported the authority of the missionary in
charge, and appears to have done his best to help him in his
work. This school has a unique character, and is not subject
to change and fluctuation inthe number of scholars like the
other schools. It was commenced for the sons of the Prime
Minister, and the chief officers inthe Government, and has,
to the present time, been confined to the children of these
families. The number of scholars has, from the first, been
about sixty. Some of the youths, presuming on their position
as sons of wealthy and influential parents, have been careless
and irregular in their attendance; but others have been
diligent, and have made satisfactory progress in their studies.
About twenty of the most promising boys have been trans-
ferred to the College as secular students, and will thus,
we hope, be fitted to fill such offices in the Government
of the country as their social position leads them to expect.
Latterly the Palace School has been taught in a private
house near Andohalo, and some distance from the Palace.
This, we believe, has affected its efficiency, and accounts
for the greater irregularity in the attendance of some of the
scholars,

The Antananarivo SUNDAY SCHOOL is doing a good work in’
providing religious instruction for a large number of the young
people in the Capital, and also in affording opportunities
of Christian work for some of the young men and women con-
nected with the city churches. This school is in affiliation with
the London Missionary Society and the Friends’ Foreign Mis-
sion Association. It was established on the 6th of September,
1874. Mr. J.C. Thorne is superintendent; Rainizafimanga is
assistant-superintendent and treasurer; and Frank Rasoama-
nana is secretary. Though not the first Sunday School started
in this country, this is the first that has been maintained for
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 205

any length of time. Its establishment was chiefly due to the
unwearied zeal and perseverance of Mr. A. Kingdon, late
missionary printer for the F.F.M.A. Funds for starting it
and for its maintenance during the first few years, were chiefly
provided by small grants from the two missionary societies and
the gifts of friends in England, but during the last two years
it has received its pecuniary support from offerings at the anni-
versary services. As many as 650 children have received
religious instruction in the school during the past six years,
and instances have not been wanting of scholars upon whose
minds and hearts the truth of the Gospel has made lasting
impression. The report for 1879 says:—“The children’s
increased acquaintance with the Scriptures is a very appa-
rent fact to those of us who have had opportunities for some
years past of testing their knowledge. Less apparent and
tangible, but not less real, we believe, is the growing
response of their consciences to the great moral and spiritual
truths of the same blessed Book.” The teachers at present
are four Europeans and ten natives; the number of scholars
is 315.

THE YOUNG MEN’S CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATION is an insti-
tution of later date than those previously referred to. It has
been in existence about five years. Its members are few,
never having numbered more than forty, and being on an
average about twenty. The objects of the association are the
same as those of similar associations in England, from which
the idea was originally derived. Its place of meeting is the
Friends’ School-room at Ambohijatovo, where Bible-classes
and other meetings for mutual instruction are held every
Saturday morning. MR. CLARK, the president of the associa-
tion, has favoured us with the following brief account of its
origin and management :—

The Young Mens’ Christian Association, or to call it by its Malagasy
name, Vy Pikambanan’ ny Tovolahy Kristiana, was commenced in the
latter part of 1875 ; two youths, who had been educated in England, in
conjunction with another Malagasy youth, were the means of its establish-
ment; they gathered around them about twenty earnest Christian young
men like themselves. But the number of members has never been very
large, and though at one time they rose to forty, the average has never
long continued to be much above twenty ; at the present time the number
of members is rather under this. The object desired by these young men
206 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

is similar to that which has induced so many in England to unite
themselves together in similar associations—self-improvement, mutual
instruction, the strengthening of each other in things true, honest, just,
pure, lovely, and of good report. To carry out these objects, meetings are
held every Saturday morning, when essays are read by the members, on
which discussions often take place; older and more experienced natives,
especially the pastors of the city churches, are invited to give addresses ;
and many missionaries have either given addresses on particular topics,
or lessons on special subjects—Biblical or otherwise. During the present
half-year, Dr. Borchgrevink of the Norwegian Missionary Society, is
continuing a series of most interesting lessons on Natural History, Mr.
Lord is teaching Logic, and Mr. Briggs and Mr. Clark are giving regular
lessons on Biblical subjects.

During the past few months the somewhat marked increase in the
drinking of rum at the Capital has been frequently discussed, and in July
of this year a Total Abstinence Society was set on foot in connection with
this association. A pledge of abstinence was very carefully drawn up,
and has obtained a few signatures from those who have been sad victims
to rum drinking.

In addition to those already mentioned, the Friends’ Boys’
School at Ambohijatovo, and the Friends’ Girls’ School at
Faravohitra, occupy prominent positions among the educa-
tional institutions in Antananarivo. Both these schools
have been in existence about twelve years, and have exerted
a powerful influence on the educational work of the Capital. -
They have also been worked in perfect harmony with the
other educational establishments which are under the care of
the L. M. S. missionaries. An account of the work of these
two institutions will be found in Chapter XI., which contains
a report of the work of the Friends’ Foreign Mission As-
sociation.

2.—EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS IN FIANARANTSOA.—
Following the example of the older Mission in Imerina, the
missionaries in the Betsileo province have, from time to
time, established such institutions, and adopted such measures,
as seemed best adapted to the circumstances of the people,
and calculated to meet the wants of the Mission. Fianaran-
tsoa, the capital of the province, has been the chief centre
of operations, and it is there we expect to find the most
advanced institutions in connection with the Betsileo Mission.
Some of these, however, are still in their infancy, and
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 207

‘are by no means so far advanced as their sister institutions
in Imerina. This is accounted for by the more recent
formation of that Mission, and by the limited number of
missionaries stationed in the province, as well as by the
peculiar ‘difficulties with which that Mission has been beset
from its commencement. Still, the wants of the churches
and of the people generally have not been neglected, and
in Fianarantsoa we find a Normal School, a Girls’ School,
a Young Men’s Christian Association, and Classes for the
instruction of native preachers.

THE NORMAL SCHOOL was begun shortly after the arrival
of Mr. Shaw in 1871, and was carried on by him, with only
one intermission, until he returned to England in the middle
of 1878. In the beginning of 1877, the school was under the
care of the Rev. C. T. Price for about six months, during
Mr. Shaw’s absence on sick-leave. In May, 1875, the first
students, who had completed their course of instruction at the
school, were appointed to the charge of country schools. On
Mr. Shaw’s return to England, the Rev. R. Baron took
the superintendence of the school, which he continued to
the end of May, 1880.

THE GIRLS’ CENTRAL SCHOOL was formed by Mrs. Shaw,
and was under her care until her return to England, when it
was joined to the Boys’ school. In 1879, Miss Cockin was
sent out by the Society to take charge of this institution, and
the school was re-formed soon .after her. arrival. The
beginning was small, but the number of scholars has recently
increased. The present circumstances of the school are
promising, and we believe that with due care, and continued
attention, it may be made equal to any institution of its kind
in the island.

THE YOUNG MEN’S CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATION was formed

about three years ago, and is proving a useful institution tothe - -

young men ofFianarantsoa. It is reported tobe in a flourishing
condition, and its members are said to unite readily in any work
which appears to be for the good of the people. The following
account of its origin and work is from the Rev. W. D.
CowAN, under whose auspices the association was formed :—
208 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

The Young Men’s Christian Association consists of young men in
membership with the churches, and most of them are preachers. This
association was begun towards the end of the year 1877. The principal
objects of the association are to promote Christian union and fellowship
amongst the members, and to encourage them to investigate and strike
out lines of thought for themselves, independent of the missionary or his
publications, of which they had become mere echoes. That these objects
have been to some extent attained, is shewn in the progress of the asso-
ciation, and in the many and varied papers (some of much excellency) which
have been read before the association. These papers have taken a wide
range of subjects, such as the products of Betsileo, Betsileo superstitions,
Folklore, ancient history, a mission journey to Ikongo, etc. etc.
The association is now a power for good in the town of Fianarantsoa. The
meetings have, up to this time, been held every Saturday morning in the
school-room belonging tothe L.M.S., but in 1878 it was agreed by
the members that an institute should be built, in order that the society might
be thoroughly independent. Plans for the building were accordingly pre-
pared, and the work was shortly afterwards begun. One part of the building,
consisting of two rooms on the ground floor, was handed over to be used
as a medical dispensary. The remainder of the ground floor will be taken
up with the lecture room and small library. The upper flat will be used
for the reception of country people who have come to town in search of
medical assistance. The institute, which is now in course of erection, will
be completed this year. The part used for the dispensary was opened
in March last, and nearly 400 patients have already shared in its
benefits.

CLASSES FOR PREACHERS have been held by the different
missionaries from the commencement of the Mission in 1870.
From time to time efforts have been made to systematise
the instruction given in these classes, but owing to continued
interruptions, and the varied duties of the few missionaries
in Betsileo, this could not be done so fully as might
otherwise have been possible. The preachers under instruction
in connection with Fianarantsoa and its districts have been
over a hundred. These classes have been of great assistance
to the preachers, but there is yet much to be done before they
can be said to be thoroughly efficient. There ought to be a
class of men specially trained to enter upon the pastorate of
the Betsileo churches, and arrangements to that effect should
be made in Fianarantsoa; special provision might easily be
made for their maintenance during two or three years of
training. At the various district stations preachers’ classes
are conducted regularly by the missionaries.
TEN YEARS’ .REVIEW. : 209

3-—ELEMENTARY EDUCATION.—Elementary Education has -

occupied a large share of the attention of the missionaries
’ during the last ten years, and with most gratifying results.
Not only the two Superintendents of Schools, who have been
specially set apart by the Directors for this work, but the
missionaries in charge of districts have also given much time
to establishing and conducting elementary schools. No
branch of mission work has been more prominent, or has been
attended with greater success, during the period now under
review, than that of elementary education. Every missionary
has felt that he could not better serve the true interests of
the Mission than by devoting a considerable portion of his
time to this work. We have had many difficulties to contend —
with in connection with it, and some of,these difficulties still
exist; but the success which has attended our efforts has
amply repaid us for any expenditure of time and energy, and
we look forward with great hopefulness to the future. Edu-
cational work assumes different aspects in the various districts
which are under the superintendence of the missionaries.
This is partly to be accounted for by the varying action of the
Government and local officials with regard to it, and partly also
by the different stages of civilisation and Christian influence
which the various tribes have reached. In Imerina, whilst the
Queen and Prime Minister have taken a most laudable interest
in educational work, there has been no Government system
of education, and only an intermittent and irregular pressure
on the part of the authorities ; and the entire management of
the schools has been left to the missionaries and the native
churches. In Betsileo, the schools have been much more in
the hands of the Government, and have been, in many
respects, subject to the control of the local officers. In
Iboina, the schools are all recognised as Government schools ;
whilst among the Sihanaka, they appear to be entirely in
the hands of the missionary.

The following report of elementary education in Imerina
has been supplied by MEssRs. THORNE and LORD, the
Superintendents of Schools, and contains a full and clear
account of the character and results of this work in the
Imerina province during the past ten years :—
210 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

STATISTICS.*
@ ~{w 9 : Schools pass-
al & je | Se [es Passes in ing an exam-
aS) 6 4§ Me le °
=a wo] 3 a2 ination in
# ifs 8 23)e8 £81 eo A
os lage) m | 9a og aah) «a bo ala ela ls
A fale Ee (Se lee") g | 2 | evesleube
2 ° ° Soles
Z| la? Pa le | el a a eFs
1871 | 30 2012 379T
1872 |157 6324 1199 fe
1873 | 142 5810 | 1519 | 1724 | 2gort| 585+ | 298f
1874 | 187 8584 | 2058 | 1777 | 2939 | 1427 | 970
1875 | 258 | 19435 | 12343 | 4574 | 3644 | 4341 | 2923 | 2119 | 171] 33 | 25
1876 | 341 | 24898 | 15673 | 9409 | 5504 | 5361 | 3855 | 2512 |219| 31 | 15
1877 | 360 | 26176 | 16654 | 8519 | 7326 | 6888 | 5005 | 3806 | 325] 49 | 37
1878 | 465 | 31928 | 18830 | 12105 | 11177 | 10016 7248 | 5622 | 399] 89 | 28
1879 | 413 | 27258 | 18131 | 11858 | 10931 | 9990 | 7895 | 6148 |373| 177! 85

Date. 1870 | 1875 | 1879

No. of Schools in connection with churches in
Imerina ........ ccc ces ccc ccncucccceecseetecces 359 | 543 | 580
No. of Scholars in the same .......... 02. ec eee 15837 34150 35380

No. of Schools whose teachers received pecuniary
aid from the L. M.S. 1.0... ........ cece ec eee 343 | 449

No. of Scholars in the same .............0.e0008, 22719 | 27858

* These statistics do not include schools beyond the limits of Imerina,
schools in the district under the care of the F. F. M. A., and the central
schools in Antananarivo.

+ These numbers represent the passes for only a portion of the schools
examined, the returns being incomplete.

} The blanks indicate that there were no returns.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 211

A merely cursory glance at the above statistics will dis-
cover that during the last ten years Elementary Education in
Madagascar has advanced and developed in a most striking
manner. And not only do these figures shew a satisfactory
increase in the number of schools, the number of children
attending them, and the improved quality of the instruction
given, but they also unmistakably indicate a significant
public opinion on the subject of education. The benefits of
education have so palpably presented themselves to.the minds
of the people during the last few years, that indifference and
resistance to its extension are markedly giving place to a
hearty interest in it, and a disposition to give it increasing
support and encouragement. The apathy and opposition
which formerly characterised the establishment and support of
a school in compliance with the commands of the Government,
or the insistance of the missionary only, are disappearing
before an approval and appreciation of education as a good
thing in itself. And the alarm, suspicion, and strange ideas with
which education was once regarded by the people are being
rapidly succeeded by the diffusion and acceptance of sounder
and juster views of the subject. Ten years ago, the great
majority of the people in Imerina looked upon the school as
an institution whereby the Government might procure better
soldiers, and the nobility and government officials more
efficient deka (unpaid subordinates). And in the minds of
many of the people there reigned a vague idea that the
missionary only wanted the children to be taught, that
he might, when they had made considerable progress, take
them across the seas for purposes of his own. Such ideas as
these, however, are rapidly disappearing, and will erelong in
Imerina, at least, become quite extinct. The people are
beginning to realise more clearly and strongly that the
school is simply intended to make their children wiser and

better, and improve their prospects in life.

At the outset, it may be well to state that this report refers
almost entirely to elementary education as it exists in
the province of Imerina, and as affected by the operations
of the London Missionary Society. Lest, however, this
statement should lead to a misapprehension, it should be
clearly borne in mind, that elementary education in Imerina,
so far as its direct action on the masses of the people is con-
cerned, owes its origin to the missionaries of the L. M. S.
and F. F. M. A., and is practically controlled and moulded
by them. Other societies, as the Lutheran, the S. P. G., and
the Jesuit Missions, have school establishments of one kind or
212 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

another in the Capital, and the two latter have also a few
small schools in the rural districts; but, unquestionably, a
very large majority of the primary schools in the provincial
towns and country villages are directly connected in one
relation or another with the two above-mentioned societies,
viz., the L. M. S. and F. F. M. A. ;

Again, it should be noted that what elementary education
does exist in Madagascar is principally confined to the
central province of Imerina, and the adjacent province of
Betsileo; the former inhabited by the Hova and the latter
by the Betsileo tribes. These two tribes occupy the greater
part of the extensive plateau which forms the interior of the
island, and the other large and important tribes which
encircle them like a great belt are, except in a few isolated
instances, in a state of the densest darkness, ignorance, and
heathenism. The first school has yet to be established
amongst many of these tribes. The powerful and warlike
Sakalava and kindred tribes to the west, have only been
touched at two or three points by Christianity and education.
An attempt was made three years ago, by means of native
evarigelists, to carry the Gospel to the numerous Bara and
Tanosy tribes to the south of the Betsileo. The efforts
of the evangelists were mainly directed to instructing the
young, and they had succeeded in gathering a few children
together, when circumstances arose that led to the abandon-
ment of the mission. A few evangelists have recently been
sent to the Taifasy, Taimoro, and Taisaka tribes lying along
the south-east coast of the island, and from reports received
from them they are attempting to establish schools wherever
practicable, and seem to have met with a fair measure of
success. The Church Missionary Society formerly, and the
S..P. G. as succeeding to their work, have laboured to spread
education among the Betsimisaraka, a large tribe stretching
along the east coast. But notwithstanding their efforts, the great
mass of the people are as ignorant as ever their fathers were.
Five years ago, an L. M. 8. missionary took up his station at
Ambatondrazaka, the chief town of the Sihanaka, a tribe lying
to the north of Imerina, and his labours in establishing and
maintaining schools have produced encouraging results. The
great bulk of the people, however, stand aloof from both church
and school; while the Antankarana to the north of them are
still lying in all their heathenism, untouched by any religious
or educational agency. Amongst the Hova and the Betsileo
alone of all the tribes of Madagascar is education generally
accepted, and arrangements made for its promotion.
| TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 213

It may not be uninteresting to give a brief sketch of the
chief incidents marking the educational movement in Imerina
during the last ten years. The great religious excitement
caused by the burning of the idols and charms, during the
latter part of the year 1869, exerted an important influence on
the progress of education. In the year 1867, there were only
eighteen schools in connection with the L. M. S. Mission,
and during the two succeeding years any increase could have
been only very slight. In 1870, however, their numbers were
largely augmented, and we find that in January of that year
the Committee requested an additional grant of £150 for
education, to enable them to meet the heavy and increasing
demands upon them. Moreover, in the following month, the
Committee, in one of its resolutions, earnestly solicited from
the Directors a speedy execution of orders for paper and
printing materials, on the ground “of the extraordinary
impulse given to education, and consequent increased demand
for books.” At the same time, the preparation of suitable
school-books received a considerable share of attention, as we
find that 10,000 Reading-books, 500 copies of an ‘elementary
Grammar prepared by Mr. Sewell, and an edition of 250 copies
of a Geography by Mr. Street, were’ordered to be printed.

It is also most interesting to notice that thus early in the
educational movement, the missionaries acted upon the sound
principle of stimulating the people to co-operate in educating
themselves. Recognising the school as one of the most
powerful instruments which they could use in their endea-
vours to raise and enlighten the Malagasy people, they
nevertheless strongly felt that the whole cost of the establish-
ment and maintenance of elementary education should not
be thrown upon the funds of the Society. And so, strenuously
as they then laboured, and have since laboured, to spread the
benefits of education throughout all grades of the population,
they have ever persistently striven to lead the Govern-
'ment and the people to appreciate the important interests
involved, and to realise their several duties and obligations
in promoting the instruction of the young. The following
two illustrations of this may be given. At the Committee
Meeting held in May, 1870, a resolution was unanimously
passed to ask the Prime Minister to grant an interview to
a deputation from the Committee, to confer with him. as to
what provisions and arrangements could be made to spread
sound and useful instruction throughout the country. And,
at another meeting, it was agreed that a list of towns, which
the Committee deemed quite able to bear the entire cost of
214 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

their own schools, should be drawn up and forwarded to the
Prime Minister. Although the above-mentioned interview
did not result in any organised scheme to be worked either
by the Government alone, or by them conjointly with the
missionaries, it did nevertheless lead the Government to take
a deeper interest in education, and publicly to declare their
hearty desire for its extension amongst all classes. At a
large Union Meeting held in December, 1870, the Prime
Minister spoke of an audience granted by Her Majesty to the
heads of the people and the soldiers, on which occasion she
expressed her great pleasure at their promises to send their
children to school, to build school-houses, and generally to
promote the interests of education. When these promises
were given, the people asked for a little delay before fulfilling
them, on account of the pressure of circumstances at the time.
And at the meeting above-mentioned the Prime Minister took
occasion to remind the people of their engagements, and to
stir them up to perform them. He spoke most earnestly in
favour of education as bringing not only blessing and benefit on
themselves, their wives and children, but improving thecountry
and kingdom. The Committee considered his remarks so
important, that they sent a formal resolution to him thanking
him for the valuable countenance and encouragement he had
given,'and expressing their readiness to operate with him
in extending school instruction throughout Imerina. During
the year 1871, the number of schools continued steadily to
increase, and the need for a more thorough and systematic
supervision of them than the ordained missionaries in charge
of districts were able to give was strongly felt. Consequently,
the Committee, in December of that year, sent an urgent
request to the Directors that a missionary might be appointed
to the charge of the Central Training Institution, and that
another might be set apart solely for the work of inspecting
and examining the elementary schools. According to the
returns for 1872, we find that at Christmas of that year
there were no less than 490 schools in connection with the
Mission in the province of Imerina alone. Of course many
of these were little more than schools in name, and in others
of a better character, the instruction given was of the most
rudimentary character, and restricted to the briefest period.
Numbers of the teachers were very ill-prepared for their
functions, being merely able to read the New Testament with
tolerable fluency, to form the letters of the alphabet and
write simple words, and perhaps work an easy addition or
subtraction sum. Mr. Barker in his report (for 1871) says:
“The ignorance of our country teachers is lamentable.”
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 215

The request of the Committee, just referred to, was heartily
‘ accedéd to by the Diréctors, and th 1872 the Rev. J. Richard-
son was designated to succeed Mr. Barker in the charge of
the Normal School, and in the latter part of the year Mr.
Thorne arrived in the island, and was appointed to superintend
the elementary schools. The following year (1873) Mr. Lord
was sent out to take charge of educational matters in Voni-
zongo, a district some forty miles north-west of the Capital ;
but owing to the rapid increase of school-work generally,
and especially in the districts affiliated to the large city
churches, he was removed to the Capital in 1874, and the
districts were divided between him and Mr. Thorne, so as
to secure a more thorough inspection and examination of
the schools throughout Imerina. The schools being thus
subject to regular and systematic inspection, in the early
part of 1873 standards of examination were drawn up, to.
direct the teachers to the subjects of chief importance, and
to give coherence and definiteness to their teaching. Time--
tables were also provided to shew them how to wisely and
economically to divide the school time, in order to secure
variety and interest in the lessons, and ensure a due proportion
of attention to each subject.

Another important event in the educational movement in
Madagascar was the Missionary Conference held in January,
1874, at which important papers on various departments
of mission work were read and discussed. And although no
paper exclusively devoted to elementary education was
prepared and read, yet the subject gave rise to an earnest
and lengthy discussion, the results of which were embodied
in a series of important resolutions passed at a subsequent
Committee Meeting held in June, 1874. These resolutions
laid down the principles on which the expenditure for ele-
mentary education was to be estimated, and on which the
grants-in-aid to schools were to be regulated. Their adoption
led the Directors to place larger funds at the disposal of the
Committee, which made possible a wider extension of
education and greater improvement in its character and
quality. They also formed the basis of a rearrangement of
the schools in four classes, to which grants of varying
amounts were given according to the quality of the
instruction, and the status and qualifications of the teachers.
The principles then adopted are still in operation, and will
be more fully considered in another part of this report.

From this time the work involved in the examination and
inspection of schools by the superintendents of education
216 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

began to increase rapidly. In the succeeding year, the
number of schools was largely augmented, and the character
‘of the instruction shewed decided improvement. Each school
was as far as possible thoroughly: examined twice a year,
and the labour shortly became so heavy and pressing that
the superintendents of education were obliged to secure the
services of a native assistant.

The vigour and activity which was generally manifest in
the educational movement at this period may be traced to .
various causes, of which the following may be mentioned
as the chief. Several European missionaries had been
located at country stations, and seeing the dense ignorance
which prevailed amongst the people, had laboured with
great energy to found and maintain schools throughout
their districts. The largely increased grants made by the
Directors, and the improvement of the methods of assisting
schools, also very powerfully aided the movement. Schools
were established in numerous villages; and at suitable cen-
tres, schools under more competent teachers were provided,
to supplement and carry on the instruction obtained in
the ordinary village schools. Concurrently with these efforts,
the Palace church had also sent out evangelists and teachers
to the more populous and important provincial towns.
These men had been trained in our College and Normal
School, and the evangelists, especially those belonging to
the upper ranks of native society, carried with them no incon-
siderable weight and influence. Their relation to the schools
has on the whole been highly beneficial, and the work they
have accomplished most successful. Moreover, the action
of the Government gave great stimulus to education at this
time, and very materially strengthened the other agencies at
work to promote its extension. It issued general orders that
free children were to be sent to school, and prohibited local
authorities from removing boys and youths in actual attendance
to do government or other forced service, except for very satis-
factory reasons. Italso relieved many teachers from govern-
ment service, and thus permitted school instruction to be
- carried on with some approach to system and regularity. To
the examinations also, Queen’s messengers were sent to con-
vey Her Majesty’s thanks to diligent scholars and admonish the
idle and negligent ; and they were also charged to do what lay
in their power to stimulate the people to provide instruction
for their children. And in addition to this, we may mention
the regular and systematic examination and inspection of the
schools by the superintendents of education as contributing, in
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 217
a very appreciable degree, to the efficient working and
management of the schools. Moreover, in the latter part
of the year 1878, the Government appointed a school-inspector
to accompany the superintendents of education, to be initiated
by them in the work of school examination, to report directly
to the Government on the state of the schools, and to convey
to the responsible persons such minor orders as the Govern-
ment might think desirable to issue with regard to the schools.
It should, however, be said that, after twelve months’ work, it
was deemed undesirable by the Committee, for various reasons,
that the native inspector should be present at examinations
in his official capacity, and accordingly for some months
past he has confined himself to assisting to conduct the
various examinations, and appears no longer in the character:
of a government official.

The next event of moment affecting education occurred at
the beginning of last year (1879). On the 25th of March of that
year, the Prime Minister in the name of the Queen made a
great kabary, which declared Her Majesty’s intention to
reorganise the army, and laid down the principles on which
future levies were to be raised. Although the kadary referred
mainly to military matters, yet three out of the twenty-nine
clauses it contained have a very significant bearing on the
schools. These three clauses are the xxiiii—xxv. The
twenty-third states that Her Majesty would not at present
deal with the scholars in attendance at school, but that
her representatives would at some future time inspect them,
and decide upon those who should or should not be counted
as scholars for the future. By clause twenty-four every
child of seven years of age and upwards is required to
attend school; and parents and guardians neglecting to
send their children are to be fined three dollars for each child
kept back, and the attendance of the children enforced also.
Any ‘person informing against delinquent parents is to
receive half the fine if the charge is substantiated. Clause
twenty-five prohibits, until further notice, any child being
received as a scholar, and the readmission of any scholar
who has ceased to attend school, or whose attendance has
been very irregular, unless special note and mention are
made of the same and reported to the proper authorities. A
fine of twenty dollars is to be imposed on any teacher
or evangelist found guilty of conniving at the infringe-
ment of this regulation, and the parents or guardians of
the child are also to be fined the like sum. The informer
receives one-third of the fine.
218 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

These clauses are emphatic enough, but eighteen months
have elapsed since their promulgation, and nothing has been
done to make them operative. Their effect, owing to the
inaction of the Government and a misapprehension as to their
application on the part of the people, has been rather to
diminish than increase the number of children in our schools.
The people argue that the Government does not intend that
any additions shall be made to the children then enrolled in
the registers until further notice be given; while the Govern-
ment it seems only intended the prohibition to refer to the
admission of young men, fairly liable to the conscription, who
might seek to make the school a refuge to escape being
comprised in the levy. The consequence has been that the
numbers for 1880 shew a falling off as compared with those for
1879, many scholars having left school and very few having
been brought in to replace them. It is much to be desired
that the Government should take steps as soon as possible to
put into execution these clauses, or at least to let it be widely
and distinctly known that children of school age may be sent
to school as freely as they were previous to the issue of the
regulations.

The general arrangements for working the system of pri-
mary education as established and conducted by the L. M.S.
Mission may be described as follows: The schools are with
very few exceptions mixed schools, and contain children
whose ages vary from four or five years up to fifteen or six-
teen. It is impossible, except in Antananarivo and at a few
of the country stations in charge of resident European mis-
sionaries, to provide for the separate instruction of boys and
girls. Also, at present, means are not available for separat-
ing younger children, suchas would be taught in an infant
school in England, from older and more advanced scholars.
In our schools, a class reading the current number of our
monthly periodical, Zezy Soa, may be found at work close to
a group of small children struggling through the alphabet.

The schools are divided into four classes: (1) Station
schools ; (2) District schools ; (3) Suburban schools ; (4) Vil-
lage schools. This division is really a topographical one and
not according to grade. The station schools are schools
connected with large and influential churches in the Capital,
or schools established at country stations selected as
residences for European missionaries. Of such schools there
are eight in the Capital, and seven in the country. The
district school is the central school of a number of village
schools linked together in a circle. Schools of this descrip-
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 219

tion are, wherever practicable, established at some important
provincial town within easy reach of the associated village
schools. They, as well as the station schools, are generally
taught by trained native teachers, and the instruction obtain-
able in them is much better than that given in the ordinary
village schools. In the fourteen mission districts into
which Imerina is now divided there are altogether twenty-
eight district schools. It should be noted, however, that the
district school does not do away with the necessity of the
schools in the villages of which it is the centre. The younger
children attend the village school, while the older and more
advanced scholars seek the better instruction to be had only
in the central district school. The suburban schools are
connected with poor though large churches in the vicinity
of the Capital, and are very similar in character to the better
class of village schools. They derive their name from their
situation in the environs of the city, and are five in number.
Village schools are schools in connection with the village
churches. They arefor the most part small, and the teachers
in charge of them, with few exceptions, have had little or no
training, and are extremely ill-prepared to perform their
functions. They are, however, useful in their way, and
under the present condition of things could not by any
means be dispensed with. Of course, efforts are constantly
put forth to improve them, and during the last five years
decided advance has been made in this direction.

From the above description it will at once be inferred that
the instruction given in these schools is of an entirely
elementary character, and attempts little more, as far as
secular subjects are concerned, than the teaching of the
three R’s. We have no system of graduated instruction
beginning with the lowest forms of a primary school, advan-
cing through a secondary or intermediate school, and at
last reaching a high school with its elaborate curriculum. .
The conditions for the development of such a system have
yet to appear. The station and district schools, quite as much
as the suburban and village schools, are but primary schools
in a very decided sense, and any advanced instruction,
properly so called, can only be obtained, in Imerina at least,
at the College and Training Schools in Antananarivo con-
ducted by the European agents of the various societies.

We now turn to the means by which such educational
machinery as is in existence in connection with the Mission
is set and maintained in motion. The necessary funds for
the maintenance of the schools come from two sources:
220 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

first from the grants-in-aid furnished from the Society’s
funds; and secondly from the contributions raised by the
churches. Not a penny comes from the Queen’s treasury,
and with the exception of the station schools in the Capital
nothing is derived from fees paid by the children. Where
fees are paid, they are little more than nominal; the total
fees from a single school averaging perhaps from eighteen-
pence to two shillings per month.

The grants-in-aid from the Society are divided out among
the various districts by the District Committee half-yearly,
according to their size and requirements, and the number and
character of the schools comprised in them. As the districts
differ very considerably in size and other particulars, there isa
corresponding variation in the grants made to them. Each mis-
sionary in charge of a district makes a report to the Committee
every half-year of the manner in which the funds entrusted to
him have been disbursed. These returns are audited, and
the Committee reserves to itself the power of revising. the
grants made to any district, either increasing or decreasing
them as it may deemdesirable. Although the missionaries in
charge of districts, in view of the varying circumstances of the
different districts, are allowed very considerable freedom of
judgment and action in the application of their grants, yet the
Committee has laid down several regulations, the infringement
of which it cannot allow except for very pressing reasons.

Of the second source from which funds are derived for the
maintenance of schools, viz., the contributions of the churches,
little need be said. Some churches shew a hearty interest in
the instruction of the young, and easily raise amongst their
own members sufficient money, with the supplementary grant
from the missionary, to carry on with fair success the schools
in connection with them. Others, on the contrary, leave the
necessary funds to be raised by the local officials by means
of a tax zsam-baravarana, i.e. a door, or inhabited house, tax.
In a great many instances the church really comprises the
large majority of the inhabitants of the village, and the
donations collected by the church are practically contributions
from the entire village community. Signs of an increasing
readiness and willingness on the part of the people to freely
furnish supplies for the support of the schools are by no means
wanting. In fact money is more easily raised for school
purposes than for any other department of missionary work.

Of buildings appropriated entirely to school purposes the
number is very small, and, except in a few instances, are
only to be found in the Capital and some of the country
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 221

mission stations. As a rule, exceptions to which are extremely
few, the church in which religious worship is held on
the Sabbath and the school-house are one and the same
building. The architecture of most of these structures is by
no means of a high order. Generally they are long, low,
clay buildings, with grass-roofs, and have a dilapidated
appearance. Light and air are admitted through the door-
ways, and two or three large square apertures cut in the
walls. The interior is by no means calculated to gratify
one’s sense of beauty. The rafters are festooned with dense
masses of ancient cobwebs; and the walls present faces
covered with dirty whitewash, and streaked in many places
by the rain having oozed through the leaky roof. While this
description will fairly apply toa large number of the buildings
in the rural districts, it should be stated that in the neigh-
bourhood of the Capital, and in some of the larger provincial
towns, very decided improvement has been made in the charac-
ter of the buildings put up during the last few years. Sun-
dried bricks have been used, and the roofs laid with tiles.
The inside walls are also plastered and coloured, and the
carpentry work executed with great neatness and finish. Most
of these buildings are, however, destitute of glass windows.
The plans being generally given by Europeans, the propor-
tions observed are as a rule satisfactory, and result in neat
substantial buildings.

The quantity of apparatus found in the schools is exceedingly
limited. Most of them possess nothing more than a few lesson-
sheets, and the text-books for the use of the teacher. A few
have, in addition to these, three or four desks, a blackboard,
and a map or two. The children sit on mats laid on the floor.

Respecting the important point of daily attendance at
school not much that is satisfactory can be said. Absenteeism
and irregularity of attendance prevail to a large extent.
Taking the total number of scholars enrolled in the registers
of the schools receiving grants from L. M. S. funds at 27,000,
probably not more than 35 per cent., say in round numbers
10,000, can be given as the average daily attendance. In
special localities, however, the average is much larger, reach-
ing as high as over 70 per cent. of the total number on the
books. Compulsion by the central or local authorities is very
partial and intermittent in its application. The Government
issues orders that every child of school age is to attend school,
but it employs no adequate means for the execution of its
behests. Some of the churches appoint men from amongst
themselves to look after the attendance of habitual truants
222 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

and others frequently absent from school. In the schools under
the charge of evangelists and teachers supported by the Palace
Church the attendance is somewhat larger and more regular
than obtains as a rule in other schools. In the minds of the
people these evangelists and teachers have some direct
connection with the Government, and are invested with special
authority. They have, nominally, power to compel the
parents to send their children to school, and do, as a rule,
succeed in securing better and more regular attendance at the
schools under their charge. Even in these cases, however,
the attendance is far from being what it ought to be. Other
serious interruptions to school work are found in the influence
of national and tribal usages, and especially in the neglect
of the people to raise their share of the teacher’s salary, and,
as a consequence, a school is often stopped for three or four or
even six months in the year.

In enquiring into the state of education in Imerina, the
qualifications of the teachers employed, or available for
service, is a point of importance to which attention should be
directed. The teachers are by no means what we should like
to have, but they are the best we can obtain, and we must in the
meantime be content to get from them what work they are capa-
ble of producing. Most of the teachers in the village schools
have had no preparatory training of any kind, and their moral
character, together with their knowledge of the elements of
reading, writing, and simple arithmetic, are the qualifications
which have led to their appointments. The large majority of
them are so ill-provided and equipped for their work, that as far
as mere knowledge and attainments are concerned they would
not be able to do more than pass the 5th or 6th standard.
It not unfrequently happens that a teacher of this class has
to be removed, or voluntarily resigns his position, on the.
ground that the children have learned all he can teach them,
and are quite as advanced as himself. To the district and
station schools, and a few of the larger village schools,
teachers possessing higher qualifications are appointed.
These have generally been trained either at the L. M. S.
Normal School, or the F. F. M. A. School at Ambohijatovo,
and their performances are greatly superior to those of
the ordinary village teachers. Still, these do not reach.
the standard we should like them to reach. Most of them
are youths under twenty years of age, and in knowledge
and teaching power the ordinary run of them may be
roughly compared to a third year pupil teacher in the common
primary schools of England. Of the true meaning of edu-
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 223

cation they have but the vaguest ideas, and faintly, if at all,
realise what a difficult, delicate, and responsible labour that of
shaping the plastic natures of children is. Notwithstanding
these deficiencies, however, they are doing most useful service,
and preparing the way for a generation of teachers who will
be as superior to themselves as they are to the inefficient
village teachers.

The stipends which the teachers receive as remuneration
for their services range from two shillings to sixteen shillings
per month. Of course it is only the trained and better qual-
ified teachers who receive the higher salaries. Sixteen
shillings a month according to our English ideas is a very
small sum ; but considering the cheapness of living, and the
fact that a teacher is freed from /axompoana, or forced service,
the remuneration is by no means unreasonable. It enables
‘aman to keep and clothe himself and family comfortably.
Some churches, either from ignorance or parsimony, or both
combined, do not choose the best qualified, but the cheapest
candidate, and of course find that in the end his uselessness
and incompetency make him a very dear article.

The general oversight of the schools, and the arrangements
for their inspection and examination, rest almost entirely
with the European missionaries. The importance of an
unceasing watchfulness in the supervision of the schools has
always been strongly felt and recognised, and in order as far as
possible to secure it, two superintendents of education are .
appointed to conduct periodical examinations and inspec-
tions, whilst the missionaries in charge of districts are held
responsible for the efficient working of the general arrange-
ments affecting the schools in their respective districts. The
duties of the district missionary consist in keeping the
schools under his charge regularly at work, of supplying them
as far as possible with apparatus, of removing untrustworthy
teachers and securing others to fill their places. He also
sees the teachers of his schools once a month, pays to them
the portion of their stipends derived from the Committee
grants, and enquires as searchingly as opportunity allows
into the condition of each school.

Moreover, if the results of an examination of a school by
one of the superintendents of education should shew it to
have made unsatisfactory progress, or furnish przma facie
evidence of unfaithfulness on the part of a teacher, the
responsibility of dealing with the case rests with the mis-
sionary in charge of the district in which such school is
situated. In fact, whatever pertains to the general working
224 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

and management of the schools forms part of the work of the
missionary, and he it is who is answerable for the putting in
operation such agencies and resources at his command, as
will tend to promote the efficiency and progress of the schools
under his charge, and secure the best results for the education
grants made by the Committee. And when it is remembered
that some districts contain from fifty to eighty schools, it
will be seen that such superintendence involves no small
amount of labour.

The work of the superintendents of education consists
principally in the regular and systematic examination and
inspection of the schools. Formerly, the schools were gener-
ally examined twice a year; now, however, owing to their
number and the reduction in the inspecting staff, one
examination yearly is as much as can be given. This work is
most important, and theregularity andthoroughness with which
it has hitherto been prosecuted has had a powerful influence
in guiding and concentrating the efforts of the teachers,
and stimulating them and their scholars to diligent and con-
tinuous attention to their duties. The strictness with which the
examinations have been conducted have materially conduced
to greater thoroughness and accuracy in the teaching. Many
of the teachers in their anxiety to make a good display, were
wont to hurry the children from one subject to another with the
greatest rapidity, utterly careless and unmindful of precision
and due order, or to confine their attention almost exclusively
to a few children in the upper classes. In the former case,
of course, nothing was done well, and in the latter the bulk of
the children learned hardly anything. Such abuses, however,
are on the decline. The results of an examination enlighten
the eyes of a teacher as to his weaknesses and defects, shew
him where he has failed and misdirected his efforts, and
point out the course for improvement in the future. It cannot
be doubted that if efficient and systematic examination
and inspection were withdrawn, the schools would speedily
deteriorate and rapidly move in a retrograde direction.

From what has thus far been said, it will be seen that the
department of education is a most important factor in our
mission operations. The Society provides the necessary class-
books, has organised and carries out a system of inspection
and examination for testing the value of the instruction given,
furnishes considerable sums of money annually for educational
purposes, and in the hands of its missionaries lie the respon-
sibility, the practical direction, and working of the general
arrangements in vogue for the promotion of elementary
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 228

education. And this education to which the missionaries
have given so much time and labour aims not only at
instructing the young in the elements of reading, writing,
and arithmetic, but has for its chief end the impartation
of moral and religious truth. The Bible is the one book
of all others to which it directs attention; and the principles
and truths therein contained are what it most strenuously
desires to instil into the minds of the young. No system of
primary education worked by missionaries must have a lower
aim. Certainly the L. M. S. missionaries in Madagascar
have had no lower aim. They have ever sought to effect a
transformation in the moral character of the school children,
as well as to impart information and convey instruction. No
doubt this object has been but very imperfectly realised
as yet. Still, considering the moral and religious condi-
tions of society in this land, and the incompetency of
the majority of the teachers, very fair progress in this
direction has been made. No inconsiderable number of
our children have, to a certain extent, come under the
power of the truth they learn in the Bibles they have
been taught to read, and are striving in what light and grace
they possess to conform their lives to it. Their apprehension of
the truth is no doubt feeble and imperfect, and their practice
is in many respects defective; yet the truth has found a
lodgment in their hearts, and He who has implanted it there
and begun a good work in them will, in His own good time,
bring it to perfection. And, to say the least, our school-
children are growing up in almost entire ignorance of
many vicious and idolatrous customs and usages that exten-
sively prevailed, and which are regarded with something like
fond regret by large numbers of the adult population.

In other directions also the influence of education has been
felt. Habits of personal cleanliness and neatness in dress
are gaining an increasing and firmer hold upon the children.
On the day of examination the array of clean white and
coloured Jamba is a most pleasing sight. The day of
examination no doubt is a day of great importance, and
special preparation in the way of dress is made for it, but it
must be said also that in their ordinary every day life the
children shew a decided improvement in cleanly habits.

The extension of elementary education has also had a
marked influence on other departments of mission work. It
has made possible an increase in the severity of the examin-
ation tests for admission into the College and Normal
School, thereby securing a more advanced class of candidates,
‘226 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

and rendering more feasible the introduction of a curriculum
embracing a wider range of subjects. It has also provided
our congregations with a large number of members able to
read the Bible and the publications of various kinds issued
by our press, and caused, a demand for more intelligent
preaching and reading of the Scriptures in the churches.

The benefits derived by the Government and people gener-
ally from the spread of education are also worthy of a
passing notice. Our schools have supplied the Government
with a body of clerks and writers. In its correspondence
with its governors and other officials, and in its proclamations
’ to the people, it now issues its communications through the
medium of print or writing, instead of the old uncertain
method of entrusting them to messengers to be conveyed by
word of mouth. The various contributions of the people
to the levy now being raised for the purchase of arms, are
recorded in the Government books by youths taught in our
schools. Our schools also furnished writers for the Sakazzam-
bohttra, the great majority of whom were quite unable to read
and write, and therefore could not make any permanent record
of the numerous important transactions their duties require
them to engage in.

Again in every-day transactions the people reap many
advantages from the general diffusion of elementary education.
Two instances may be given. Formerly native traders
limited their business to such transactions as could be easily
retained in the memory, and of course such could only be on
a small scale. Now, however, being able to keep accounts
of their sales and purchases in writing, they engage in much
more extensive operations, and employ as much as two or
three thousand dollars in trade where previously they would
only have used a hundred. In like manner, testaments were
formerly given orally, being declared by the testator in the
presence of a number of witnesses. This mode of proceeding
naturally gave rise to many abuses and impositions. Wit-
nesses were bribed to commit perjury by disappointed parties,
and frequently two-thirds or more of the whole estate of the
deceased would be consumed in carrying the case before the
native judges before a verdict would be given. Now, however,
wills can be made in writing, and much litigation is thereby
prevented.

Before closing this report we would say a few words on the
relation which the native Government holds to elementary
education. From what has been already said of the action of
the Government, and the position which our Society occupies,
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 224

‘it will be gathered that we have no system of elementary
education wholly or partially supported and controlled by -
the Government. The vole of the Government has hitherto
been confined to the exertion of a very modified and inter-
mitted pressure on the parents to send their children to
school, and to the expression on various public occasions of
the favour with which they regard the educational movement.
The Government has not built a single school-house, trained
a single teacher, or spent a penny in the purchase of school
apparatus. It has given no grants-in-aid from the central
treasury, neither has it made any arrangements for raising
funds for school purposes by local action of any kind.
It has left the burden of founding and maintaining schools
_ to be borne by the various Missionary Societies, conjointly
with the churches in connection with them. Although much
cannot be said for the direct relation of the Government to
our school system, it nevertheless is deserving of great credit
for the attitude which it has assumed and consistently
maintained during the last few years towards education. It
strongly approves of education, and recognises its value as
a powerful instrument in elevating and developing the nation,
and has given every opportunity for its extension. It does
not believe that to educate the people is to sow the seeds
of political insecurity and disquietude, and does not think
that the security of its rule is dependent upon the con-
tinuance of dense ignorance amongst the masses. It desires
that the benefits of education should not be restricted to
any one section of the people, but that the lower as well
as the upper classes, the ruled as well as the rulers, should
alike share in its blessings. We cannot but regard this
friendly attitude of the Government as a very pleasing and
encouraging fact which augurs well for the further develop-
ment of education throughout the country. The views which
the Government entertains with regard to education must
erelong impel it to take a more active part in promoting its
interests. It has acted in some measure on the principle of
the right of a Government to compel the people to accept the
boon of education placed within their reach, but it must go
farther, and realise its obligations to do its part in helping the
people to provide for themselves the education which it
professes to set such value upon. Ifit enacts laws compelling
the attendance at school of all children of school age, and
decides to interfere efficiently and prominently in the education
of the country, it must be prepared with a scheme devised to
raise the necessary funds. It must regard the present
arrangement as transitional, and the sources from which the
228 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

requisite funds are now drawn as not likely to furnish larger
supplies, and therefore requiring to be largely supplemented
to adequately meet the demand of the case.

In conclusion, we cannot but feel that our school system
has been one of the most powerful subsidiary agencies of our
mission work in Madagascar. In the payment-by-results
sense it has been eminently satisfactory ; and its influence on
the social, moral, and political life of the people has been
most decided and beneficial.

In illustration of the general statements made in the above
report by the Superintendents of Education, we append the
following extracts from the reports of the missionaries in
regard to educational work as it is carried on in the various
districts.

The REv. W. E. Cousins writes as follows of the schools
in the Amparibe district :—

The one bright feature in my review of the past is the advance made
in the education of the children. In 1870 there were but eleven schools,
containing 653 scholars, in the entire district. Now there are fifty-nine
schools with 2573 scholars. In 1870 we had no properly trained teachers.
Now, thanks to the Normal School, many of our teachers are very
efficient. And consequently there is not simply an improvement in the
number of children attending school, but in even a larger degree there is
improvement in the attainments of the children. The whole of the schools
were examined in January and February last, the western part by Messrs.
Parrett and Pickersgill, and the remaining part by Mr. Lord and myself;
and there was certainly much to encourage us in these examinations.
More than 2000 children were present at the various examination centres ;
1416 passed in reading, 1053 in writing, and 880 in arithmetic. Our great
trouble in school work is to get the churches to do their share towards —
paying the teachers’ salaries; and we are constantly grieved to find
schools broken up for a time because of some irregularity in this matter.
We have also to contend with not a little unwillingness on the part of .
parents to send their children to school. But looking back on the past,
and comparing the schools of 1870 with those of 1880, there is indeed
great reason for thankfulness and hope. I am trying now to exercise a
good influence on the young people of the district by holding periodical
children’s services at differént centres. Some of these services have been
thoroughly well attended, and great interest has been shewn in them.

Of educational work in the Ankadibevava districts the
Rev. C. JUKES says :—

In the year 1870, there were forty-one schools in this district, with 1647
scholars; there are now seventy-three schools, with 3231 scholars,
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 229

shewing an increase of thirty-two schools and 1584 scholars. Elementary
education has been, perhaps, the most successful and the most
satisfactory department of all our work. The half-yearly examinations
excite a healthy competition, and afford a stimulus to teachers and
parents. Iam not able to tell how many New Testaments have been
circulated amongst the schools, but certainly a very large number. Our
supreme aim is not simply to teach the young people to read and write
but, by God’s blessing, to lead them to become disciples of Christ. Some
hundreds of boys and girls have, during the past ten years, received a
Christian education; and many having since become church members,
they compose the most intelligent and useful part of the congregation to
which they belong, and those upon whom our teaching tells most. The
hope of not the Mission only but of the whole country is in the schools.
Their influence and the changes they have wrought throughout the entire
land of the Hova is unmistakable, and must be yet moreso. Many of
the adults, even those who are professing Christians, have still clinging to
them the rags and tatters of heathen practices and superstitions, which is
likely to last all through their life; but the children, on the other hand,
are growing up in almost entire ignorance of the idolatrous religion of their
fathers. In carrying on my schools I have often been in straits as to
funds for the payment of teachers. Parents are either too poor to pay, or
else are not sufficiently alive to the importance of educating their offspring.
If it had not been for the liberal grants of the L. M S., and assistance
from private friends, most of the schools would have had to stop. The
schools are not entirely dependent upon funds from foreign sources, for I
have only in one or two instances paid more than half the teacher’s salary,
and in the majority of cases not more than a third. The greatest enemies
to our elementary schools are the Jesuit priests, who by gifts of toys, absurd
and wicked misrepresentations, and a promise to lead by some sort of
“royal road’’ to knowledege and wisdom, without so much as the trouble
of attendance at school, manage to decoy away some of our scholars.

Of school work in the Isoavina district the REV. P.G. PEAKE
writes :—

Ten years ago a little teaching was done here and there among a few
children in this district. At the present time there are thirty-one schools
under regular instruction, with an average attendance of 1413 daily.
They are taught reading, writing, arithmetic, and the leading facts of
Scripture history and the main truths of Christianity by catechisms, as
well as grammar and geography. Registers of daily attendance are kept,
and a thorough examination of every school is made annually. Inthe year
1872 there were ninety-three children who could read, and a dozen or so
who could write. The report of the last school examination shows a total of
1240 readers, with a corresponding increase in those able to write and work
sums in arithmetic. A fortnightly minor examination of all the schools
has been held in one of the catechisms and one other subject, at which
a children’s service has been held, with an address from the missionary.
230 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

At the beginning of school work in this district, schoolmasters and teachers
were brought from other parts to teach, but it has got on so far that now
all the teachers and masters are, with two exceptions, young men and
youths belonging to the district.

Elementary education in the Ambatonakanga district is
thus reported on by the REv. C. F. Moss :—

Ten years ago the following words were used by the writer in his yearly
report to the Directors of the Society :—‘‘There is no department of the
work here from which I would hope greater things as to the future of my
district than the Christian training of the young. The next generation of
Christians ought to take altogether higher ground than is now possible
for their untaught parents ever to attain to. But I must candidly confess
that as to its! dvesen¢ state no department of Christian work gives me
so little satisfaction. I have no properly trained teachers, and in most
cases the qualifications of such as I have are so meagre as to make
one very doubtful as to much real good being done by them.” Since
that time, owing to the large number of carefully-trained teachers sent
out from the Normal School, and to the steady and constant impetus
given to the schools by the half-yearly examinations conducted by Mr.
Thorne, and latterly by Mr. Lord, all this has changed. The standard
of teaching, and with it the standard of attainment, has been wonderfully
raised; while the bright intelligent countenances of the scholars, and
their clean neat attire, contrast very pleasingly with the dull unmeaning
ignorance and the extreme absence of neatness and cleanliness which
used to thrust themselves on our attention ten years ago. At the present
time, however, the schools are in a state of suspense waiting for some
definite decree of the Government respecting them, and this has not been
found favourable to either the efficiency of their regulation, or the numbers
in actual attendance.. Much difficulty is also found in many instances in
raising the teachers’ salaries, and in arousing in the untaught parents of the
scholars any adequate sense of the value of knowledge to their children,
and of the duty of supporting the schools in which such knowledge is given.

The Rev. J. PEILL’s report of the Ambohibeloma district
contains the following paragraph :—

With regard to the schools, I find that there are seventy-seven in this
district. Of these I can only personally answer for seventy. These
seventy schools I know do exist, and I can also personally answer for all
the statistics relating to them. They have all come into existence within
the last ten years. The numbers of scholars given in the accompanying
statistics are not the numbers on the school registers (which amount in all
to 7443), but only the numbers actually seen and examined quite recently.
This school work is all new work, and certainly more satisfactory signs of
progress are apparent in it than in the churches. To have been, to a great
extent, the means of about 1600 children learning to read within seven
years is encouraging, and the existence of 1400 or 1500 Bibles and Test-
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 23k

aments in the Ambohibeloma district marks outward progress in the right
direction. Very few adults can read throughout that wide west. The
Bibles and Testaments are chiefly owned by the school children. May
God bless the possession of His written word to their highest good! A
good deal of my time and strength has been thrown into this school work.
For some years I have had large weekly gatherings of schools at Ambohi-
beloma and Anjamanga (ten miles west), myself personally superintending
the instruction of the children in the Scriptures.

While Mr. Pickersgill was yet with me, we took about twenty lads, the
most advanced we could find, to train as teachers. Last year, their course
being completed, and their names having been given to the Queen, they
were publicly set free from all government business to teach in the schools.
Most of these lads are now at work, and they are, of course, far ahead of
any teachers previously existing in the district.

For some time, half-yearly school examinations were regularly conducted
throughout the district, and were a great stimulus to the teachers and
scholars. Of late, owing to our greatly diminished staff, and the conse-
quent numerous other engagements of the Superintendents of Education,
yearly examinations have had to suffice. Recently, there has been consi-
derable reduction in the numbers of scholars in our schools. Everybody
seems to be waiting to see what new steps the Government intends to
take. A sewing-class has been taught twice weekly, and has been well
attended by the girls, who have made great progress in this useful art.

Of the schools in the Andohalo district the Rev. H. W.
GRAINGE reports :—

In 1870 there was no school at Andohalo, but in the following year one
was established, and from that time until the present it has been steadily
working. The number in regular attendance at the present time is, on an
average, ninety-three. In consequence of there being four large upper
schools in the immediate neighbourhood, viz., at Ambohijatovo and Fara-
vohitra for boys; and at Ambodin’ Andohalo and Faravohitra for girls, it
has been found more convenient as well as more economical that this
school should sustain the character of a preparatory school for the younger
children, and as they advance they are transferred to one or other of the
aforesaid upper schools. The standard of attainments therefore is not
high, but the position occupied is none the less useful.

In the country, many changes have been made. Schools that existed
only in name now exist in reality ; new ones have been established ; and
weak and inefficient ones have been united to their great advantage, thus
enabling us to employ trained and competent teachers without increasing
the burdens of the people. We have now a school in connection with
every village throughout the district. And for the past four years a
capitation grant has been paid to each school by the mother church, in
order to stimulate the diligence of both teachers and scholars. The
results were highly satisfactory until the reorganisation of the army
232 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

commenced about two years since, and then the schools began to
decline, and have been gradually doing so ever since. I refrain from
entering upon this matter, or attempting to indicate the various causes
that have contributed to the present state of affairs, as it appears in
the report of the Superintendents of Education. But apart from these
causes there is a great disinclination on the part of the majority of the
people to send their children to school at all. The benefits of education
are not yet appreciated by the people at large. Their mode of life does
not render it necessary to them, as to those in civilised communities.
Schools have from the beginning been regarded as simply a part of church
organisation ; and learning as a religious virtue, perhaps, but certainly a
virtue of little practical value in life. Indeed by many it is regarded as a
‘disadvantage, sirice notwithstanding all disclaimers on the part of those
in authority, they still believe it renders them more liable to government
service. Among the truly Christian portion of the community, however,
educational advantages are greatly valued ; chiefly as a means of enabling |
them the better to understand God and His Word. Their children are
sent to the schools with great regularity, and often at considerable
inconvenience to the parents, for the children are very useful to them in
many ways, especially in tending cattle and helping at busy agricultural
seasons. We are now anticipating a government proclamation rendering
education compulsory. Once we thought this secured, but the weakness
and general inefficiency of the Malagasy executive rendered the law a
dead letter, as it has rendered so many of the others that have lately been
promulgated. I greatly fear that further legislation on the matter will
meet with a similar fate. Meanwhile so far as the churches are concerned
we must endeavour to secure our object in other ways.

The Rev. E. H. STRIBLING reports as follows on educa-
tional work in Vonizongo :—

The practically heathen condition of the majority of the population
has hitherto thrown the chief responsibility of elementary education upon |
the church members. The people as a body are averse to having their
children educated, although on various occasions messengers have been
sent by the Queen to command the attendance of all children. It is chiefly
to the churches, aided by the Society, that Vonizongo is indebted for what
advancement has been made in the education of the young. By the
last published report it is seen that seventy-two schools have been
established in the district of Vonizongo; others have been begun, but
only those schools are recognised in which the teacher’s salary has been
paid in part by the churches connected with them. The condition of
these seventy-two schools differs, according to the size of the villages and
the diligence of the churches; but the serious drawback to the progress ©
of our schools arises from the general indifference of the people to
education, thus leaving the teacher’s salary to be provided mainly by the
church members. There are three special schools which we have been
carrying on at the Fiarenana mission station with some success.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 233

(2) A Sunday School was established in 1875, for the children living at
or near the mission station. The number in attendance averages seventy ;
there are three teachers who assist Mrs. Stribling in the conduct of the
school ; and we have good hopes that many of the childrén may eventually
prove true professors of that Saviour whose name they are now being
taught to revere. A half-yearly collection on behalf of the native mission-
ary society is made by the scholars.

(4) Mrs. Stribling’s Boarding School for native girls is conducted on the
mission premises, and was founded in March, 1877. Commenced under
_ some misgivings, we have found that, instead of failure, we are needing
much larger premises to enable us to increasé the present number of
scholars (thirty-five) to eighty or a hundred. Numerous pressing applica-
tions from Christian parents in various parts of Vonizongo have had to be
refused for some time past, owing to the want of sufficient building accom-
modation. The progress of the girls in the various subjects taught by the
four native teachers who assist in the school is satisfactory, and the
advance made by the girls in knitting, tatting, crochet, and embroidery,
* promises a valuable addition to the future industry of Vonizongo.

(@) Our third special school is a more advanced one for boys. Since its
foundation in March, 1877, this school has been gradually improving in
position and growing in favour with the churches, as seen by the many
applications for entrance to the pass examinations. It was formed to
educate teachers for the various villages, where at present the schools are
of the most elementary character. The stricter discipline maintained
appears to have increased its value in the estimation of the churches.
The present number in regular attendance is forty. Twenty-five have
already completed their three years’ course of instruction; and ten have
recently obtained schools with a fair monthly salary. There is an impor-
tant branch of this school in Valalafotsy, conducted by Rarinosy, our
evangelist, and Rasoanoro his wife; the classes there were re-commenced
in 1878, and contain sixty scholars.

Of the Ambohimanga schools the REv. J. WILLS writes :—

The boys have been under the charge of the evangelist and teachers
sent out by the Palace Church, and have been taught in the town of
Ambohimanga (into which no European is allowed to enter), the upper
classes, however, coming down to me for lessons in English and Scripture.
The girls have been taught in the school-room adjoining our house, and
have been under our entire charge.

These schools have been a great power for good in this neighbourhood.
The Queen and Prime Minister, on their visits to this ancient capital of
Madagascar, have given them great encouragement by the flattering
notice they have taken of them, and by various presents they have made.
Many of the lads have come to take a leading part in the services of the
churches, in singing, reading the Word of God, and, in some cases, by
preaching. Several of the senior girls have lately been married to lads
from the boys’ school, but still continue their attendance, attracted by the
advantage of learning needlework from Miss Graham. This year (1880),
234 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

however, twenty-two of the senior lads have left the school, having been
taken by the Government as writers in Antananarivo. If they take up
their permanent residence there, as seems probable, they will be a great
loss to the churches here, but we may trust that they will prove a useful
element in the future development of this kingdom.

Mr. Wills also writes as follows of the schools in the Fara-
vohitra district :—

The schools in this district have received constant attention, and have
borne very gratifying fruits. The trained teachers from the Normal
School have rendered very valuable service. Two of these have been
associated with the evangelist at Fiaferana, and two with the evangelist
at Ankazondandy. The attendance of the scholars has been satisfactory ;
and their attainments as tested by the annual examinations very respec-
table. Some of the elder lads have become teachers, and have been
formally acknowledged as such by the Government; some have entered
the College with a view to the ministry; and others have become writers
to the Sakazzam-bohitra in the country. The encouragement given by
the Government to education has been of great help in breaking down the

prejudices and fears of the parents; and our schools are no longer
dreaded, but sought after.

The foregoing reports on elementary education have refer-
ence exclusively to Imerina. The following brief account
of educational work as carried on in Betsileo will shew the
different circumstances that have existed in the two provinces,
and the special difficulties with which the missionaries in
charge of the Betsileo Mission have had to contend in regard
to this important branch of their work :—

On the arrival of the Rev. J. Richardson in 1870, he at once entered
actively on the work of education. Schools were either newly formed
or reorganised in Fianarantsoa, and in the villages where there were
churches. In the course of 1872 Mr. Shaw arrived, and arrangements were
soon afterwards made for the formation of a Normal and Central School.
Helped by the Glasgow Foundry Boys’ Society, sufficient funds were
found to carry on this work. A new and commodious school-room was soon
built, and several cottages were erected near the schoolmaster’s house for
the more promising pupils. In 1870 and 1871, there appears to have been
but one school in Fianarantsoa, but in 1872 another was opened for the
lower classes. These schools were again united in 1874, and a girls’ class,
which had been taught by Mrs. Shaw, was strengthened and became the
Girls’ Central School. Mrs. Shaw continued to carry on the work of this
school until within a short time of her return to England in 1878. To
outward appearance, elementary education during 1873 and 1784, and for
two or three years afterwards, was in a prosperous condition all over Betsileo,
But this was only in appearance, as the systera on which it was being
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. | 235

carried on was unwise, unjust, and sometimes even cruel. In what precise
year this system was introduced we are not able to say, but it was probably
in 1872 or 1873, for early in 1874 complaints were made to some of the
missionaries. Shortly after the Queen’s visit in 1873, it was arranged by
the local government that all the scholars should be called up to Fiana-
rantsoa for examinatidn, once every three months. This was carried on
for some years, causing great hardships and leading ‘to much evil among
the scholars, notwithstanding the complaints of the missionaries and their
opposition to it; and it was only brought to an end by the threatening
attitude of the Jesuit priests. This was the system in operation from
1873 to 1878. Grown up men and women, some even with grey hairs,
were set apart in each village as scholars. This was their government
service which they were compelled to perform, on penalty of being put
in chains. These scholars were only set apart td the schools in connection
with the L. M.S. Mission, and on this account it became a just ground
of complaint on the part of other missions, while at the same time it
made the schools more government than mission ones. To carry on this
plan, a certain number of heads of families were appointed, whose duty
it was to clothe and feed these selected scholars. The consequence of
all this was that there were continual difficulties as to clothes and
rice, and to arrange these formed no small part of the governor’s
duties at the quarterly gatherings. Large numbers, even thousands,
could be spoken of as being examined before the governor, but both
teachers and scholars knew well the consequences if they did not put in
an appearance. J/¢zfehy, a kind of school police, were appointed to see
that all the scholars attended, at least those set apart by government,
and there were few others in any of the schools. During the greater
part of six years no advance of importance was made in elementary
education. The same scholars put in their appearance at every examina-
tion, and shewed but little improvement over the past. This was the
general state of education, although in some districts things were better.

The schools being thus to a large extent in the hands of the local
government, it was easy for some to suppose that the churches were
in the same position, while such was far from being the case. The
evils above stated were ever before the missionaries, and caused them
great anxiety. In October, 1876, they made an effort to reorganise the
schools, and introduce a better system. Unfortunately, they failed, not
being able to carry out their plans. Things therefore went on in this way until
the end of 1878, or the beginning of 1879, when the missionaries caused
all the old people to be dismissed from the schools, and also those who were
married and had children. The school police were also dismissed, and strong
efforts were made to reorganise the schools. These were successful, and
towards the close of 1879, we saw the beginning of a radical change in the
schools south of the Matsiatra. A new system is now in operation, and
great advance has been already made. There are nowno selected children
set apart specially to our schools. No one is called upon to clothe
and feed scholars other than their own children. Instead of a few, each
236 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

house has now to send a scholar to school, but the selection of the
school is left to the people. Thus in theory education, so far as supported
by the government, is impartial to all missions. The result is that the
scholars both in the Roman Catholic and Protestant schools have
greatly increased. In addition, large numbers are now coming voluntarily
to school, that never would have come under the old system. Ex-
aminations of schools are generally made every six months, when instead
of being brought up to the government house in Fianarantsoa, several
schools are gathered together to some central church in their near
neighbourhood. Examinations of teachers are jn one or two cases also made
every six months. At all the mission stations there are classes for women
carried on by the wives of the missionaries. In 1870 there were about
twenty-one schools in Betsileo, now in 1880 there are over a hundred, and
the increase in the number of scholars has been much greater in proportion.

An account of educational. work in the Sihanaka and
Iboina provinces will be found in Chapter III., where it is
included in the special reports of the Missions recently
established in these distant parts of the country.

A COMPARATIVE TABLE OF GENERAL SCHOOL STATISTICS
FROM 1870 TO 1880.

Scholars Children Contributions

Date. Schools. (Boys & Girls).)able to read. | for School purposes.
Zs a.
1870 359 15,837 ? ?
1871 531 27,643 5084 177 0 0
1872 498 20,568 6661 188 5 oO
1873 )
no complete returns.
1874 §
1875—1876 652 36,534 10,494 397 9 2
1876—1877 | 657 37.412 15,501 593 4 10
1877—1878 784 44,794 20,220 676 17 8
1878—1879 882 48,150 25,364 543 17 0

1879—1880 862 43,904 25,586 817 19 3

The contributions for school purposes, given in the above table, do not
include the money raised by the people for the purchase of slates, pencils,
and school-books, etc. A large sum has been raised for such purposes, but
we have no definite means of estimating the amount.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 237

CHAPTER VII.

LITERATURE.
——o 89-2

HE importance of the literary department of mission
work in Madagascar cannot possibly be over-estimated.
When it is remembered that the Malagasy have no native
literature, that the reduction of the language to writing is
but comparatively recent, that even the most intelligent and
best educated of the natives are dependent on foreign help for
all general information, and that the missionaries resident in
the island are the only parties by whom the literary wants of
the people can possibly be supplied, it will be seen that not
only must this work necessarily occupy a large share of the
missionaries’ time and care, but that it is also worthy of the
highest talent of which the Mission is possessed. The recent
advance of education, as evidenced by the statements in the
previous chapter, shews the necessity of giving increased
attention to this important branch of labour. Much has been
done during the last ten years, as we shall be able to shew,
towards supplying the people with such literature as their
circumstances seemed to require ; but the field is large, the
demands are increasing, and considering the vastness of the
work to be done a beginning only appears to have been
made. We trust that the next decade will witness still greater
results in this department of work than have been realised in

the last.

The literary work of the past ten years divides itself into
two branches, viz., special and general. The special branch
is easily defined, and covers’ chiefly, if not exclusively, the
work connected with Bible revision ; but the general literature
is of a more varied character, and covers a much larger area.
Each of these branches of literary work will demand a brief
notice.

1.—BIBLE REVISION.—Whilst the revision of the Malagasy
Bible is committed to a joint-committee consisting of repre-
sentatives of all the Protestant Missions in the island, yet
the burden of the work rests upon the Principal Reviser,
238 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

the Rev. W. E. Cousins, of the London Missionary Society,
who has been set apart for this special work. To Mr.
Cousins we are indebted for the following account of the
origin and progress of what will be universally regarded as
one of the most important branches of missionary labour :—

In the last ten years’ Review of the Madagascar Mission
notice was taken of a slight revision of the New Testament,
the results of which were embodied in a very useful edition
with marginal references published by the British and Foreign
Bible Society. The same Review also contained a brief
notice of an attempt to secure a thorough revision of the Old
Testament, which attempt, however, was soon abandoned,
owing to the heavy strain of work occasioned by the burning of
the idols. No further steps in the direction of revision were
taken until early in 1872, when a letter on the subject was
prepared and forwarded to the Bible Society, signed by repre-
sentatives of all the Protestant Missionary Societies having
agencies in Madagascar, except the London Missionary
Society.

The L. M. S. missionaries afterwards united in a general
conference, held Feb. 28th, 1872, at which a series of resolu-
tions were drawn up for the purpose of being submitted to the
judgment of all the Protestant missionaries in the island. On
the 3rd of April a second conference was held, when the
suggestions of the various missionaries were considered, and
several changes made in the original paper, a copy of which, in
its amended form, was signed by representatives of the London
Missionary Society, the Society for the Propagation of the
Gospel, the Church Missionary Society, the Norwegian Mis-
sionary Society, and the Friends’ Foreign Mission Associa-
tion; and was forwarded to the British and Foreign Bible
Society. This joint letter contained a brief account of the way
in which the existing versions had been prepared by the mis-
sionaries of the L. M. S. and published at the expense of the
B. and F. B. S., and also of the steps already taken by the
L. M. S. missionaries in the direction of further revision and
improvement, and laid down the following propositions for
the consideration of the Committee of the Bible Society :—

1.—That owing to their faultiness of style, and general inaccuracy, the
various versions of the Bible in use among the people of this country call
for a thoroughly revised and standard version.

2.—That there is no reason for further delay in entering upon the work
of revision, but on a broader basis than hitherto; and that it will,be well to
commence it as soon as arrangements can be satisfactorily completed,
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 239

3.—That in order that such a revised Bible may obtain the confidence
of, and be treated as a standard version by, all Protestant Christians of
the country, it is highly desirable that all the Protestant Missions which
have Agencies therein should be fairly represented in the work.

4.—That a revision of the Malagasy Bible cannot be satisfactorily
accomplished unless competent native assistance be secured from first to
last ; and that no questions of Malagasy language and idiom should be
settled in the absence of trustworthy native authority.

5.—That the proposed translation be made in the Hova dialect, which
is more or less understood throughout the whole country; but in cases
where Hova words or phrases are understood by tribes resident beyond
the limits of Imerina, care should be taken to employ such, in preference to
others having the same meaning which may be in use in Imerina alone.
That the versions of the Bible at present in circulation be made the basis
of the new work.

6.—That in the prosecution of the work, a plan somewhat similar in
principle to that recently pursued by the missionaries of Southern India,
in the revision of the Tamil Bible, is such as commends itself to our
judgment, viz. :—

(2) That an Editor and Committee of delegates, representing all the
Protestant Missionary Agencies in this country, be appointed to carry out
the work, with whom shall rest its entire responsibility.

(4) That the various Societies be represented as follows :—

The London Missionary Society by 3 delegates
The Society for the Propagation of the Gospel 1 ”
The Church Missionary Society 1 ”
The Norwegian Missionary Society 2 ”
The Friends’ Foreign Mission Association I ”

(c) That the order of procedure in prosecuting the work be as follows :—
That the delegates collect, in any way they see fit, from those they
represent, such suggestions and criticisms of the present versions as they
may incline to prepare, and submit them to the Editor, for his use, at his
own discretion, in drawing up a new text. That when prepared, proofs
of this text be printed, and sent to every missionary represented; and
that after due time has been allowed for its thorough examination, and for
the delegates to have obtained the opinions of the missionaries, and to
have forwarded them to the Editor for his reconsideration, a meeting of
the Revision Committee be held, with which shall rest the responsibility
of settling the text.

That the sheets passed by the Revision Committee be reprinted, and
again circulated as was previously done; and before the work is put to
press the whole be submitted to a second and final revision.

That the Revision Committee arrange all matters of detail, decide on
the order in which the books of the Bible be revised; and determine, and
240 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

give due notice of, the time allowed for the preparation of criticisms, etc.,
of the existing versions, and for the examination of the proofs.

7.—That this Conference has great pleasure in recommending the Rev,
W. E. Cousins for the office of Editor, believing that his proficiency in
Malagasy, his acquaintance with the original languages of the Bible, and
his qualifications in other respects, render him peculiarly fitted to fill that
office in an efficient and scholarly manner.

The Bible Society very cordially consented to the proposed
revision in general accordance with the terms of the letter;
and they also generously resolved to undertake the whole
pecuniary responsibility involved; that is to say: (1) the
payment of the salary of the principal reviser, (2) the travel-
ling expenses of the delegates, (3) the cost of native assis-
tance, (4) the purchase of critical books and stationery, and
(5) the printing of the proofs.

The consent of the Bible Society having been obtained,
the next step was the appointment of delegates. As soon
as these had been appointed, a preliminary meeting was held
on July 24th, 1873, at the house of Mr. W. Johnson, of the
F. F. M. A., who had acted as secretary to the conference.
At this meeting several preliminary questions were discussed,
and it was resolved that, instead of entering at once upon
the general work, a tentative revision of a few selected chapters
(viz. Gen. i—iv.; Ex. i, ii.; Psa. ii—v.; Mat. v.—vii.)
should be made by the principal reviser, and that a session
should be held for the purpose of discussing these portions
and of ascertaining, more in detail than could be done in
general conversation, how far the delegates were united in
judgment as to the extent and character of the changes
required. This plan it was hoped would simplify the work
of the principal reviser, and give to his future labours
greater definiteness and precision.

This first session was held in December, 1873. Daily
sittings of five or six hours were held for about three weeks, -
and the following portions were revised :—Gen, i.—iii.; Ex.
xX. 1-17; Psa.i., li.; Mat. v. 1-22; vi. 9-13 (in all 142 wv.).
This session enabled the committee to settle many general
principles and shewed the practicability of the work.

A second session of four weeks was held May 11th to
June 5th, 1874, when Gen. iv. 1—xx. 18 and Mat. i. 1—iv. 25,
v. 23—Vi. 8, vi. 14—vili. 28 (636 vv.), were revised.

A third session of four weeks was held Nov. 16th to Dec.
11th, 1874, when 24 more chapters of Genesis (viz. xxi.—xliv.)
containing 845 verses were revised.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 241

At the close of this session a change in plan was introduced,
and instead of holding sessions of several weeks duration,
the committee agreed to sit one day per week, with an
occasional session of a week, or a fortnight, when. arrears of
work should render this necessary. These weekly sittings were
begun Feb. 2nd, 1876, and were continued without serious
interruption till March 7th, 1876, by which time the committee
had revised as far as the end of Exodus in the Old Testament
and to the end of Matthew in the New Testament. Owing to the
fact that the principal reviser was about to leave for England,
on furlough the work was then suspended. From the first
meeting in December, 1873, till this temporary suspension,
the committee had sat 103} days and had revised 118
chapters. The principal reviser was also able to leave with
the committee his preliminary versions of Leviticus and
Numbers.

As soon as possible after the return of Mr. Cousins in
1878, the weekly meetings were resumed, and from Nov. 14th,
1878, till the present date, June 12th, 1880, sixty sittings
have been held, and 158 chapters have been revised, viz.,
the books of Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, Mark, Luke,
and John. During the same period the principal reviser
has prepared his preliminary versions of Deuteronomy,
Mark, Luke, John, the Psalms, Joshua, and the greater part of

- Judges.

It would be premature to say much as to the character of
the work. Indeed it cannot be said even in the revised
portions to be at all complete, as changes are continually
being made that will affect the parts already issued, and the
whole will have to pass the committee a second time before
being printedin a volume. The work has not escaped adverse
criticism ; especially in regard to two points have complaints
been made, viz., the many changes in the spelling of proper
names, and the rather free introduction of foreign words.
The committee will no doubt duly weigh all such criticisms.
In the meantime, it is encouraging to note that even adverse
critics admit that the translation is a great improvement
upon all that has preceded it. The committee as well as the
principal reviser make great use of native assistants, and to
them will the credit be due in very many instances of
having helped to make the translation easy and idiomatic.
It is now making fairly rapid progress, and before another
Ten Years’ Review will be due, the new version will, we trust,
be already in use among the native Christians for whose
benefit it is being prepared,
242 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

The work has brought together missionaries of different
societies unaccustomed to joint action, and has given to the
natives generally an easily appreciated evidence of the
substantial unity of belief prevailing among Protestant
Christians; and all interested in the work will respond to
the wish of the Editorial Superintendent of the Bible Society,
“that no difference of opinion or policy in other matters
may hinder the harmonious proceeding in the present work.
It is hard indeed for men to co-operate when they feel that
there is a material difference between them; but this Bible
revision is a blessed opportunity for exhibiting to the island
the unity of faith in the Scriptures as the authoritative
declaration of God’s will.”

2.—GENERAL LITERATURE.—Earnest efforts have been
made during the past ten years towards supplying the Mala-
gasy with a Christian and general literature. The L. M. S.
Printing establishment in Antananarivo, which was com-
menced in the time of the former missionaries and resumed in
1862, was enlarged in 1876, and has been kept in full operation
during the whole period now under review. The publications |
of various kinds that have been issued from the Mission Press
since 1870 have not been less than 1,500,000. The F. F.M. A.
started a Printing Office in 1872, from which has also pro-
ceeded a large number of educational and other books. The
native Government set up a press on the 11th of November,
1869, and possesses a staff of official printers: the use of this
press, however, has hitherto been confined to the printing of
kabary and other documents relating to the routine business
of the kingdom. In addition to these, there are Printing
presses in connection with the Norwegian, the S. P. G., and
the Jesuit Missions; but the use of the Norwegian and S.P.G.
presses is very limited, and that belonging to the Jesuit
Mission is used chiefly for the production of works of a devo-
tional character. All the books of general interest, which
have hitherto been printed in Madagascar, have. proceeded
from the L. M. S. and the F. F. M. A. presses, and most of
them from the former.

The list of publications which accompanies’ this Review
shews the extent and nature of the work done at the L. M.'S.
press since 1870, but there are a few of these publications which
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 243

require a more special notice :* (1) The monthly Magazine
called Zeny Soa (Good Words) claims the first mention, as
being the oldest and most popular periodical yet published in
Madagascar. The first number was issued in January, 1866,
so that it has now a history of nearly fifteen years. From
1866 to 1869 Zeny Soa was published once in two months. At
the beginning of 1870 a monthly issue was begun, which has
been continued to the present time. It' has now a monthly
circulation of 2700, and arrangements are under consideration
by which the circulation will probably be very considerably
increased. (2) A quarterly publication called M/panolo-tsaina
(Counsellor or Thought-giver) has also been commenced. The
first number was issued in May, 1877. This is of a much
higher character than Zemy Soa, and is intended chiefly to meet
the wants of the better educated teachers and preachers.
Its circulation has therefore been somewhat limited, and
has varied from 400 to goo. (3) Commentaries on Genesis,
Matthew, Luke, 1 Corinthians, Galatians, and 1 Timothy have
been issued, and several others are in course of preparation.
(4) An Introduction to the Old and New Testament has
been recently completed. This has met a felt want among
the preachers and evangelists, and is eagerly sought after
by them. (5) A Bzble Dictionary has also been taken in
hand to be published in four parts, two of which have already
been issued, and the third isin the press. (6) A new illustrated
edition of the Prlgrim’s Progress has been published, of which
3000 copies were disposed of in less than two years. By
means of the kind and liberal assistance of the RELIGIOUS
TRACT SOCIETY we were able to supply the schools at a reduced
price, which greatly increased the sale. (7) A new and
enlarged edition of the Malagasy Hymn-book has also been
printed, and 12,000 copies have been sold in a little over
twelve months. (8; It is also a fact well worthy of notice
that more than 350,000 copies of the First Lesson-book have
been printed and sold within the last ten years. This large
sale has already greatly increased the number of those who
are able to read, and may be expected to bear additional
fruit in years to come. (9) We would state with much’thank-

* Reference has already been made to a number of books, which have
been published in connection with the College ; see pp. 189 and 190.
244 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

fulness to the Directors of the Religious Tract Society, that
by the aid of a special grant made by them for the purpose,
nearly 200,000 Tracts on various subjects have been widely
circulated in the island, and have, we are sure, been produc-
tive of much lasting good. (10) At Christmas, 1875, the first
number of the Antananarivo Annual was published. Four
numbers have now been issued, for the years, respectively, of
1875, 1876, 1877, and 1878. The publication was omitted
last year (1879), but arrangements are now being made for its
continuance. This is an English publication, and is designed
for the use of the missionaries and the friends of missions
and progress, whether in England or in other parts of the
world. The numbers already published contain a vast amount
of information with regard to the history, customs, folk-lore,
language, botany, geology, and physical geography of Ma-
dagascar ; and also with. regard to the progress of civilisation
and Christianity in this large African Island. These numbers
have been highly appreciated, and we feel it exceedingly
desirable the publication should be continued.

As already stated, the F. F. M. A. have also sent forth a
large number of educational and other works. The number
of publications issued from their press since 1872 is 539,468.
Prominent among their publications are the following:
(1) A small English and Malagasy Dictionary, for use in
the higher educational institutions; (2) Dzseases and thetr
remedtes, a book of nearly 7oo pages, by Dr. Davidson;
(3) A Physical Geography, by the Rev. R. Toy; (4) A
LItstory of the Christian Church in the first three centuries ;
(5) Zhe Companions of our Lord, following in the lines of a
publication of the Religious Tract Society, by Charles E. B.
Read, M. A., late scholar of Trinity College Cambridge;
(6) Zhe Patriarchs, or the lives of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob; (7) The Jsan-kerintaona, or the Malagasy Annual, a
book containing a variety of general information, and intended
for the better educated natives. Two numbers only have, as
yet, been published ; (8) The Sakazzan’ ny Ankizy Madintka,
or the “Children’s Friend.” This is illustrated with engrav-
ings that have appeared in the English “Children’s Friend,”
and is very popular among the children in our schools. It
has now been published monthly for nearly three years, the
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. | 245

first number having been issued in January, 1878. It took the
place of a former publication called Vary Tondrahan-tantely
(Rice mixed with honey), which was also illustrated with
engravings that had appeared in the “British Workman.”

On the first of May, 1875, the first number of the first
Malagasy Newspaper was published, under the title of My
Gazety Malagasy. This was hailed with pleasure by all the
friends of progress and education, though the manner in
which it was started gave rise to misgivings in the minds of
many. The paper was issued monthly, and fora short time it
was favourably received, and bid fair to become a permanent
institution. We are of opinion that with judicious manage-
ment it would have continued to gain favour, and would
have become an immense power for good. Being, however,
in the hangs of one or two individuals, who seemed to be
indifferent to the responsibility which rested upon them,
and of the importance of the work they had undertaken,
the paper failed of its desired success. After the first few
numbers, it was made the medium of publishing unfriendly
criticisms on the rulers and institutions of the country, which
resulted in its suppression after fourteen numbers had been
issued. Its suppression, however, was not by the peremptory
exercise of authority on the part of the Government, but was
the result of a friendly conversation between the Prime
Minister and Mr. Joseph S. Sewell, of the F. F. M.A., at
whose press the paper had been printed. We trust that before
long we may witness a better and more successful attempt to
establish a Malagasy Newspaper, which is a desideratum in
the country.

The following account of the L. M.S. Printing establish-
ment, including a list of publications which have issued from
the press since 1870, has been supplied by Mr. J. PARRETT,
the Superintendent of the Press :—

In 1871, when the “Brief Review’ was issued, the L. M. S.
Printing Office had recently been enlarged and extended, and
the staff consisted of about twenty-five lads and young men.
Since then large additions and improvements have been
made, especially in 1875 and 1876, when new offices and
warehouses were erected, and the stock of type and machinery
increased. We have now large and commodious offices and
246 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

warehouses, a fair supply of type, machinery, and binding
tools, a small stereotype foundry, and a lithographic press.
At our recent stock-taking, it was found that the buildings,
type, presses, binding tools, paper, printed books, etc. etc.,
exceeded £6000 in value. About forty-five persons are on
the permanent staff of the Printing Office; but in busy times
as many as eighty persons are fully employed.

The Malagasy make good printers, but require a consider-
able amount of vigilant superintendence. They are fairly
intelligent, moderately honest, and persevering up toa certain
point; but.as soon as they have acquired a slight knowledge
of their business it is difficult to push them on to become
proficient. Altogether about 150 lads and young men have
passed through the L. M. S. Printing Office since 1863, and
of these about fifty have done well, and have acquired a very
respectable knowledge of printing and binding. Many have
failed from insufficient education; some of the sharpest and
likeliest lads were found to be dishonest; whilst a considerable
number were too lazy to succeed. After many trials of
patience, we have a staff of young men who are a credit to
the establishment. They are intelligent, industrious, and
well-behaved, with a regard for the property in their care, and
conscientiously endeavouring to do their work to the best
of their ability. For some years now the office has been
conducted without trouble or disturbance of any kind, and I
trust will long continue to be so.

Much of the printing that is done is turned out as cheaply
and expeditiously as possible, but still of very fair quality.
This present “TEN YEARS’ REVIEW” may be regarded as a
fair specimen of our ordinary printing. And when it is borne
in mind, that not one of the printers employed upon it knows
a word of English, or has received anything beyond the
most simple education, and also that the whole of the work
(except the proof-reading and superintendence) has been done
by the natives, such as, composing the type, correcting,
making it up into pages and sheets, machining, pressing,
binding, etc., I think it shows pretty conclusively that the
Malagasy have acquired a fair knowlege of printing and
binding.

In addition to the charge of the L. M. S. Printing Office,
the Depét of the BRITISH AND FOREIGN BIBLE SOCIETY has
been in our care during the ten years under review, and I
here give the numbers of books issued from the Depét from
January 1, 1871, to June 30, 1880.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 247

1871.
Issued on Sale...... 3474 ? Free grants .......18,322
1872. ‘
Issued on Sale...... 10,717* Free grants........10,254
_ 1873.
Issued on Sale...... 3868 Free grants...... + 3976
‘ 1874.
Issued on Sale...... 7999t Free grants........ 2247
1875.—Six months.
Issued on Sale...... 4132 Free grants........ 2675
1875—6.
Issued on Sale...... 6186 Free grants........ 2572
1876—7.
Issued on Sale...... 7504 Free grants........ 4759
1877—8.
Issued on Sale...... 8647 Free grants........ 5525.
1878—9g.
Issued on Sale.. ... 3421 Free grants........ 2260
1879—80.
Issued on Sale...... 3814 Free grants........15,550
Total Sales ....59,762 : Total Grants ....68,140

In the nine years and a half the total number of Bibles,
Testaments, etc., sold is 59,762, to which must be added 5000
Paragraph Testaments, issued from our Press, thus bringing
up the total to 64,762. The total number of free grants,
consisting of Psalms, Lukes, Acts, etc., amounts to 68,140,
making the total issue of Bibles, Testaments, and Portions
to 132,902 in the nine years and a half.

Below I give a list of the publications issued from the
L. M.S. Press from year to year during the period under
review. Some of the books therein named have been two, three,
or four years in the press before they were completed, as the
convenience of the writer is one of the first things to be
considered. The list therefore does not give any fair idea of
the work done year by year. In addition to what is tabulated,
avery large amount of miscellaneous and private work is
done, nearly equal in-amount to what is specified in the list. All
this work, however, is for the Mission, or the missionaries, no
commercial work being executed at the L.M. S. Printing Office.

* A New Testament to be sold at 6d. was received in 1872, this accounts
for the large increase in the sales.
+ The shilling Bible was issued this year.
248 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

It is necessary that I should allude to one other matter,
viz., the large grants of paper from the RELIGIOUS TRACT
SociETy. When the office was started in 1863, every sheet
of paper we possessed was given by the above Society, and
from that time to the present their grants have been frequent
and generous. But for their liberal assistance many of our
most popular books could never have been issued, and the
Printing Office would shrink to half its dimensions if these
grants were withdrawn. All books printed on paper granted
by the R. T. S. are marked thus * in the list given below.

LIST OF BOOKS PUBLISHED AT THE L.M.S PRINTING OFFICE,
FROM JAN. 1, 1871, TO AUG. 31, 1880.

1871.
* Almanac, folio, 1500.
* Good Words, 16pp. 8vo and cover, 1200 copies monthly.
* Scripture Lessons, 4pp. 8vo., 6nos, supplement to Good Words, 1000
each number.
Union Report, 28pp. and cover 12mo, 850.
English Lessons (2), 100pp. 12mo, 500.
* Lesson-book, 24pp. 12mo, 2 editions, 50,000.
Candidates’ Catechism, 20pp. 16mo, 20,000.
Malagasy Grammar, 36pp. 12mo, 1000.
L. M.S. “Brief Review,’’ 40pp. 8vo, 450.
Malagasy Proverbs, 80pp. 12mo, 250.
Rafitiavana, 32pp. 16mo, 1100.
Tracts, Nos. 5, 6, 7, 8, 4pp. 16mo, 40,000.
Anatra, 32pp. 12mo, 2000.
Arithmetic, 60pp. 12mo, 500.
Union Report, 72pp. 12mo, 1900.
Te Deum, 8pp. 16mo, 1000.
First Catechism, 3lpp. 16mo, 5000.
Tract on Marriage, 12pp. 12mo, 550.
Second Reading-book, 40pp. 12mo. (C. M.S.), 550.
Life of Christ, 8pp. 16mo, 10,000.
Life of Luther, 76pp. 12mo, 1750.
Questions on Genesis, 32pp. 16mo, 550.
Faith, &c., 16pp. 16mo, 1700.
Sermon, 12pp. 12mo, 550.
Tract on Polygamy, 12pp. 12mo (C. M. S.), 550.
Sermon, 12pp. 12mo, 550.
* Questions on Luke, 40pp. 16mo, 1100.
Key to Arithmetic, 26pp. 16mo, 350.
* Volume of Tracts, 204pp. 12mo, 1100. .
* Introduction to New Testament, 140pp. 8vo, 450.
Sermon, 12pp. 12mo, 550.

* *

* * *© @ *# @ ©
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 249

, 1872.
_ Sheet Almanac, folio, 900.
* Tllustrated Almanac, 28pp. 12mo, 1000.
* Good Words, 16pp. 8vo. and cover, 1500 to 2000 monthly.
* Scripture Lessons, monthly supplement to Good Words, 4pp. 8vo.
Report of Congregational Union, 60pp. 12mo, 850.
Advice to Church Members, 4pp. 12mo, 15,000.
“‘Who ought to be Church Members ?”’ 12pp. 12mo, 1200.
Candidates’ Catechism, 20pp. 16mo, 25,000.
Report of Congregational Union, 74pp. 12mo, 900.
Candidates’ Catechism for Teachers, 26pp. 12mo, 200.
Report of Theological Institution, 36pp. 12mo, 600.
Questions on Exodus, 32pp. 16mo, 530.
Strange things in a Prison, 16pp. 16mo, 2000.
First Catechism, 32pp. 16mo, 800.
Who ought to be Baptized ? 2pp. 8vo, 2000.
Sermons, 12pp. 12mo, 5 nos., 550 each.
Malagasy Grammar, 70pp. 12mo, 1000.

1873.

Sheet Almanac, folio, 1500.
Good Words, 16pp. 8vo. and cover, 2000 to 3000 monthly.
Scripture Lessons, 4pp. 8vo, monthly supplement to Good Words, 2270.
Communion Service, 16pp. 8vo., 500.
Report of Congregational Union, 36pp. 12mo, 250.
Geography, 76pp. 12mo, 1000.
First Arithmetic, 16pp. 12mo, 2000.
Hand-book of Hermeneutics, 58pp. 12mo, 1000.
* First Lesson-book, 24pp. 12mo, 50,000.

First English Lesson-book, 58pp. 1Z2mo, 500.
* Commentary on First Corinthians, chap. i. —vii., 174pp. 8vo, 500.
* First Scripture Catechism, 32pp. 16mo, 5000.
Malagasy Kabary, etc., 64pp. 12mo, 1000.
The Sabbath, 26pp. 12mo, 2000.
Key to First Arithmetic, 18pp. 12mo, 500.
Sermons, 12pp. 12mo, 2 nos., 550 each.
Report of Theological Institution, 12pp. 12mo, 250.
Genesis i.—iii., Exodus i., ii., 12pp. 12mo, 200.
Introduction to the Malagasy Language, 88pp. 8vo, 300.
Tables of Weights and Measures, Spp. 8vo, 450.
The Care of the Body, 52pp. 12mo, 1000.
Tables of Weights and Measures, 12pp. 12mo, 1000.
* Sermons on Jesus Christ, 124pp. 12mo, 2000.
* Life of Jesus Christ, 125pp. 8vo, 500.
* Catechism on the Four Gospels, 66pp, 16mo, 1000.

Bible Revision, 32pp. 8vo, 150.

Paragraph Testament, 576pp. 18mo, 5000.
250 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

*

*

eo * # 6

1874.

Almanac, folio, 1500.

Good Words, 16pp. 8vo and cover, 1750 to 2100 monthly.
Report of Congregational Union, 36pp. 12mo, 800.
Questions on the Life of St. Paul, 36pp. 18mo, 1000.
Bible Revision, 182pp. 8vo, 150.

Malagasy Grammar, 12pp. 12mo, 2000.

Malagasy Grammar, 36pp. 12mo, 1000.

First Lesson-book, 20pp. 16mo, 4800.

Catalogue of L. M. S. Library, 12pp. 12mo, 100.
Biographical Catechism, 52pp. 18mo, 3000. ‘
Commentary on Galatians, 152pp. 8vo, 1600.

Malagasy Grammar, 58pp. 12mo, 1000.

Minutes of Imerina District Committee, 26pp. 8vo, 200.
Report of Congregational Union, 48pp. 12mo, 800..
Introduction to the New Testament, 262pp. 12mo, 2500.
Service of Song, Pilgrim’s Progress, 28pp. 8vo, 300.

1875.

Almanac, folio, 950.
Good Words, 16pp. 8vo and cover, 2000 to 2400 monthly.
Scripture History, 62pp. 12mo, 2000.
Key to First Arithmetic, 18pp. 12mo, 1000.
Fables, etc., 16pp. 12mo, 2000.
Report of Congregational Union, 50pp. 12mo, 900.
Malagasy Grammar, 12pp. 12mo, 5000.
” 36pp. 12mo, 5000.
Second Lesson-book, 48pp. 16mo, 8600.
Second Arithmetic, 12pp. 12mo, 3700.
Tune and Hymn-book, Sol-fa, 122pp. 8vo, 500.
Tunes and Hymns, Sol-fa, 8pp. 8vo, 200.
First Arithmetic, 12pp. 8vo, 2000.
Lessons on the Life of Christ, 180pp. Svo, 2000.
Questions on the Bible, 8pp. 16mo, 10,000.
Chalmers’s Text Book, 56pp. 12mo, 1000.
The Evils of Drunkenness, 4pp. 18mo, 10,000.
Questions on Deuteronomy and Joshua, 20pp. 12mo, 500.
Malagasy Folk-Lore, 42pp. 12mo, 300.

* Tract, 4pp. 24mo, 10,000.
* Supplement to Hymn-book, 112pp. 32mo, 3840.

Notes on Ikongo, 8pp. 8vo, 100.
Hermeneutics, 60pp. 12mo, 1000.
Bible Revision, 230pp. 8vo, 150.
Malagasy Annual, 128pp. 8vo, 750.

TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 25t

— 1876.
Almanac, broadside, 1500.

* Good Words, 16pp. 8vo and cover, 2700 monthly.

Report of N. E. Vonizongo District, 20pp. 8vo, 250.

First Scripture Catechism, 32pp. 15mo, 7000 (several editions).

Report of Congregational Union, 88pp. 12mo, 1200.

* Supplement to Hymn-book, 100pp. 18mo, 3350.

Life of John Wikliffe, 26pp. 12mo, 1000.

Tract, 4pp. 18mo, 1000.

First Lesson-book, 16pp. 16mo, 40,000 (several editions).

Key to Second Arithmetic, 16pp. 12mo, 1000.

Report of Isoavina District, 16pp. 12mo, 100.

Sermon, 26pp. 12mo, 500.

* Tract, 4pp. 18mo, 1000.

Lessons on the Gospels, 160pp. 12mo, 1000.

Malagasy Customs, etc., 60pp, 12mo, 500.

The Little Bird, Sol-fa, 8pp. 16mo, 1000.

Marriage and Burial Services, etc., 48pp. 8vo, 500.

* Supplement to Hymn-book, small type, 84pp. 32mo, 4000.
Genesis, revised edition, 130pp. 18mo, 2000.
Communion Service, 16pp. 8vo, 250.

* Second Scripture Catechism, 118pp. 18mo, 1000.
Remarks on Writing Malagasy, 28pp. 16mo, 100.
Hymns and Tunes, 12pp. 12mo, 300.

Pastor’s Manual, 46pp. 8vo, 25.

Minutes of Imerina District Committee, 16pp. 8vo, 70.
Sermon, 16pp. 12mo, 600.

Analysis of Sentences, 38pp. 12mo, 250.

Report of Congregational Union, 38pp. 12mo, 950.
Key to First Arithmetic, 16pp. 12mo, 500.

Report of Imerina District Mission, 60pp. 8vo, 350.
Bible Revision, 312pp. 8vo, 160.

* The Work of the Holy Spirit, 16pp. 12mo, 1000.

* Questions on the Bible, 8pp. 24mo, 4000.

* Biographical Catechism, 44pp. 16mo, 2400.

Malagasy Annual, 132pp. 8vo, 700.
Lessons in Sol-fa, 16pp. 8vo, 300.

* *

1877.

Almanac, broadside, 1800.
Good Words, 16pp. 8vo and cover, 3000 monthly.
The Care of the Churches, 64pp. 12mo, 1000.
Folk-lore, 148pp. 12mo, 150.
* Biographical Catechism, 40pp. 16mo, 5000.

About Preaching, 16pp. 12mo, 500.

First Lesson-book, 16mo, 22,000, (several editions).
* Second Lesson-book, 48pp. 16mo, 10,000.

Fables, 24pp. 12mo, 2000.

*
252 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

The Little Bird, Sol-fa, No. 1, 8pp. 16mo, 500.

* Bible Dictionary, vol. 1, 152pp. 8vo, 1000.

* Tracts, Nos. 1 to 9, 62pp. in all, 15,000 each.
Hermeneutics, 60pp. 12mo, 1000.

* Reprint of Good Words, vol. 1, 119pp. 8vo, 500.

* The Counsellor, No. 1, 72pp. 8vo, 750.

* The Bible, and how we got it, 86pp. [2mo, 700.
Malagasy Grammar, 58pp. 12mo, 500.

* Outlines of Sermons, 112pp. 12mo, 1600.

* The Wisdom of God displayed in His works, 92pp. 12mo, 1000.

* First Scripture Catechism, 32pp. 16mo, 10,000.
Object Lessons, 28pp. 12mo, 400.

* Supplement to Hymn-book, 96pp. 32mo, 5000.
Notes on the Isoavina District, 24pp. 12mo, 100.

* The Christian Religion, 65pp. 12mo, 2500.
Sermon, 20pp. 12mo, 500.
First English Reading-book, 60pp. 12mo, 500.
Report of N. E. Vonizongo District, 20pp. 8vo, 300.
North-east Madagascar, 80pp. 8vo, 330.
Report of Congregational Union, 32pp. 12mo, 950.
Report of L. M. S. College, 42pp. 12mo, 200.
Sermon, Rev. xxii. 17, 16pp. i2mo, 600.
Singing Lessons, Sol-fa, 32pp. 8vo, 950.
Geography, 120pp. 12mo, 750.
Counsel for Pastors, 36pp. 12mo, 1000.
Report of Congregational Union, 82pp. 12mo, 950.
Chemistry, 346pp. 12mo, 250.
Report of Imerina District Mission, 92pp. 8vo, 475.
Mission Work among the Sihanaka, 23pp. 12mo, 50.
Report of the Isoavina District, 25pp. 12mo, 100.
Shorter Catechism, with references, 36pp. 12mo, 3000.
Sermon, Mar. viii. 36, 16pp. 12mo, 600.
Lights and Shadows, 92pp. 8vo, 500.
Sermon, Isa. ii. 18, 12pp. 12mo, 200.

* The Counsellor, Nos. 2 and 3, 64pp. 8vo, 750.
Antananarivo Annual, 140pp. 8vo, 600.

1878.
Almanac, broadside, 1800.
* Good Words, 16pp. 8vo and cover, 3000 monthly.
* Tracts, Nos. 10-14, 44pp. 12mo. 15,000 each.
* The Counsellor, reprint of No. 1, 72pp. 8vo, 200.
The Lord’s Supper, 16pp. 12mo, 4000.
Candidates’ Catechism, 16pp. 16mo and cover, 2500.
Report of Congregational Union, 32pp. 12mo, 1000.
* The Counsellor, Nos. 5, 6, and 7, 64pp. 8vo, 750 each no.
The Bara and the Tanosy, 24pp. 12mo, 2500.
Sermon, Jao. iii. 3, 7, 20pp. 12mo, 600.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 253

Report of N. E. Vonizongo District, 20pp. 8vo, 150.
Church Account Book, 12pp. 8vo, 900.
First Lesson-book, 8pp. 16mo, 28,000, (several editions).
Dictionary of the Bible, vol. 2, 158pp. 8vo, 1000.
Ornamental Alphabets, 8pp. 12mo, 1200 (several editions).
Logic, 110pp. 12mo, 5000.
The Harvest needing Reapers, 32pp. 12mo, 1200.
Statement in Reply to Recent Criticisms, 44pp. 8vo, 600.
History of Greece, 150pp. 12mo, 500.
Sermon, 16pp. 12mo, 600.
Sermon, 16pp. 12mo, 650.
The Little Bird, Sol-fa, Nos. 2 and 3, 8pp. 16mo, 1000 each.
Report of L. M. S. College, 33pp. 12mo, 230.
* The Pilgrim’s Progress, Ist part, illustrated, 208pp. 16mo, 3000.
Report of Congregational Union, 68pp. 12mo, 950.
Report of West Vonizongo District, 16pp. 12mo, 200.
Report of the Madagascar Mission, 140pp. 8vo, 400.
* Commentary on Matthew, 274pp. 8vo, 2500.
Report of the Sihanaka Mission, 24pp. 12mo, 60
Antananarivo Annual, 128pp. 8vo, 420.

1879.
Almanac, broadside, 1800. ©

* Hymn-book, large type, 216pp. 18mo, 3000.
* Good Words, 16pp. 8vo and cover, 3000 monthly.
Commentary on Genesis, 176pp. 8vo, 1000.
The Little Bird, Sol-fa, reprint of Nos. 1 and 2, 8pp. 16mo, 1000 each.
First Lesson-book, 6pp. 16mo, 62,000 (several editions).
Candidates’ Catechism, 16pp. 16mo and cover, 10,000.
Report of Congregational Union, 44pp. 12mo, 950.
* The Counsellor, Nos. 8, 9, and 10, 64pp. 8vo, 750 each.
Sermon, Isa. iii. 10, 11, 16pp..12mo, 500.
* Hymn-book, small type, 80pp. 18mo, 10,000.
* Salvation, and how to obtain it, 122pp. 12mo, 1000.
English Lessons, 48pp. 8vo, 750.
Tune and Hymn-book, Sol-fa, 184pp. 8vo, 1000.
Sermon, Sal. cxix. 11, 16pp. 12mo, 500. .
* Scripture Geography, 16pp. 16mo, 500.
Malagasy Grammar, 45pp. 12mo, 2500.
The Epidemic, 4pp. 12mo, 3500.
The Epidemic, folio, 3000.
Report of Congregational Union, 72pp. 12mo, 950.
Report of L. M. S. College, 33pp. 12mo, 200.
First English Reading-book, 60pp. 12mo, 1000.
Hymns and Tunes, &pp. 8vo, 250.
Report of the Sihanaka Mission, 20pp. 12mo, 70.
. Moral Philosophy, 27pp. 12mo, 400.
* Biographical Catechism, 39pp. 16mo, 6500.
254 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

Salvation, 16pp. 12mo, 500.

* Short Bible Catechism, 8pp. 16mo, 500.
Report of the Madagascar Mission, 156pp. 8vo, 500.
Bible Revision, 496pp. 8vo, 100.

1880.
Almanac, broadside, 1400.

* Good Words, 16pp. 8vo and cover, 2800 monthly.
Report of West Vonizongo District, 12pp. 8vo, 50.
Malagasy Grammar, 12pp. 12mo, 5000.

* Second Reading-book, 48pp. 16mo, 5000.

* Commentary on First Timothy, 64pp. 8vo, 500.

* The Forbidden Thing, 24pp. 12mo, 3000.

* Introduction to Old Testament, 318pp. 12mo, 500.

* The Counsellor, No 11, 64pp. 8vo, 500.

History of England, 216pp. 12mo, 1000.

Ornamental Writing, 8pp. 8vo, 500.

First Reading-book, 16pp. 16mo, 22,500 (several editions).
Moral Philosophy, 79pp. 12mo, 350.

The Little Bird, Sol-fa, No. 3, 8pp. 16mo, 500.
Catechism, in the Words of Scripture, 32pp. 16mo, 1000.

* Good Words, May special number, 40pp. 8vo, 7500.
Report of L. M. S. College, 24pp. 12mo, 200.

Bible Revision, 728pp. 8vo, 100.

IN THE PRESS.

Large Malagasy Grammar.
Theology of the New Testament.
Systematic Theology : Soteriology.
Geography.
Euclid, books 1 and 2.
The Parables of our Lord.
The Sermon on the Mount.
History of Rome.
History of the Church in the Days of the Apostles.
English Lesson-book.
The Preacher’s Friend: a Manual in Homiletics.
The Pilgrim’s Progress (complete, illustrated).
Hymn-book (reprint). ‘
Commentary on First Corinthians.
Ten Years’ Review of L. M.S. Mission.
Bible Dictionary, vol. 3.
&e. &c. &c.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 255

BOOKS IN PRINT.

School Books.
First Lesson-book, 16pp. 16mo.
Second Lesson-book, 48pp. 16mo.
First Arithmetic and key, 30pp. 12mo.
Second Arithmetic and key, 28pp. 12mo.
Life of Jesus Christ, 16mo.
First Scripture Catechism, 32pp. 16mo.
Biographical Scripture Catechism, 40pp. 16mo.
Questions on the Life of St. Paul, 46pp. 18mo.
Object Lessons, 28pp. 12mo.
Ornamental Writing, 8pp. 8vo.
Fables, etc., 24pp. 12mo.
Malagasy Grammar, 12pp. 12mo.
Malagasy Grammar, 45pp. 12mo.
Geography, 120pp. 12mo.
Questions on the Four Gospels, 68pp. 18mo, and map.
Scripture History, 62pp. 12mo.
Lessons from the Four Gospels, 160pp. 12mo.
Modulator, etc.
Short Lessons in Sol-fa, 32pp. 8vo.
The Little Bird, No. 1, 2,.3, 8pp. 16mo, song's and tunes for children.

. College Manuals.

English Lesson-book, 48pp. 8vo.
First English Reading-book, 60pp. 12mo.
Analysis of Sentences, 41pp. 12mo.
The Bible and How we got it, 88pp. 12mo.
Hermeneutics, 60pp. 12mo.
Logic, 110pp. 12mo.
The Wisdom of God displayed in His works, 98pp. 12mo.
Systematic Theology (zm the press ).
Church History (7% the press).
The Preacher’s Friend (2% the press).
The Parables of our Lord (2% the press).
History of England, 218pp. 12mo.
History of Greece, 146pp. 12mo.
History of Rome (7 che press).
Large Malagasy Grammar (77 the press).

General Geography (27 the press).
- Euclid, books 1 and 2 (2% the press).

For Preachers, Pastors, etc.
Candidates’ Catechism, 20pp. 16mo.
Advice to leaders of Churches, 32pp. 12mo.
The Care of the Church, 66pp. 12mo.

“Take heed unto thyself,’’ supplement to the ‘“‘Care of the Church,’’
36pp. 12mo.
256 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

Marriage, Funeral, and Baptismal Services, etc., 48pp. 8vo.
The Christian Religion, 64pp. 12mo.

About Preaching, 16pp. 12mo.

Fifty-two Outlines of Sermons, 112pp. 12mo.

Sermons about Jesus Christ, 124pp. 12mo.

Volume of Tracts, etc., 196pp. 12mo.

Salvation, and how to obtain it, 122pp. 12mo.

Commentaries, Helps to the Study of the Bible, etc.

Commentary on Genesis, 176pp. 8vo.
» Matthew, 274pp. 8vo.
Lessons from Luke, 182pp. 8vo.
Commentary on Galatians, 159pp. 8vo.
», First Timothy, 64pp. Svo.
Introduction to the Bible, 559pp. 12mo.
Bible Dictionary, vols. 1.and 2, 308pp. 8vo.
‘ Chalmers’s Text-book, 56pp. 12mo.
_ Catechism of the Bible, 118pp. 18mo.

Miscellaneous.

Genesis, revised version, 130pp. 18mo.
Life of John Wikliffe, 26pp. 12mo.
“The Forbidden Thing,’’ 24pp. 12mo.
The Work of the Holy Spirit, 16pp. 12mo.
The Sabbath : the Lord’s Day, 26pp. 12mo.
The Care of the Body, 52pp. 12mo.
Life of Martin Luther, 76pp. 12mo.
The Pilgrim’s Progress, 208pp. 18mo.
Malagasy Customs, etc., 56pp. 12mo.
Malagasy Kabary, etc., 64pp. 12mo.
Hymn-book, 80pp. 18mo.

” 216pp. 18mo.
Tune and Hymn-book, 184pp. 8vo.
Good Words, 16pp. 8vo and cover, monthly.
The Counsellor, quarterly, 64pp. 8vo.
The Antananarivo Annual.

Tracts.
True Happiness, 8pp. 12mo,
The Bible and I, 4pp. 12mo.
The counsel given by our Lord, 8pp. 12mo.
The Priest and the Bible, 8pp. 12mo.
What makes the Bible the Word of God, 16pp. 12mo.
The Blacksmith and Mad Dog, 4pp. 12mo.
The Fearful Chain, 8pp. 12mo.
Riches not Happiness, 6pp. 12mo.
“Hold your Tongue,’’ 2pp. 12mo.
The Lord’s Supper, 16pp. 12mo.
Profitable Conversation, 12pp. 12mo.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 257

CHAPTER VIII.

MEDICAL WORK.
tt

N our last decennial Review, we find the following statement

in reference to the Medical Mission, which at that time
existed in Madagascar :—“The Medical Mission at Analakely,
formerly connected with the L. M. S., but now supported
by Dr. Burns Thompson and his friends, has been worked
in harmony with thé L. M.S.; and the missionaries of the
Friends’ Foreign Mission Association have also joined heartily
in the common work....This Mission is well sustained by
Dr. Burns Thompson and his friends in Scotland....A large
Hospital, three Dispensaries, and a Medical College, are
efficiently conducted by two medical missionaries and an
English nurse. A native medical missionary has also been
sent to Fianarantsoa, in the Betsileo country, and is main-
tained partly by the L. M. S.” This arrangement for the
support and conduct of the Medical Mission had then been in
existence for three years {since 1867), and the same system
continued in operation till 1876, when circumstances arose
which led Dr. Burns Thompson and his friends to with-
draw their support from the Mission; and Dr. Davidson, who
had superintended it from its commencement, left the island.
From that time, the conduct of the Medical Mission was
thrown back upon the London Missionary Society, and, at the
request of the Imerina District Committee, the Directors under-
took the responsibility, and promised to send out a medical
missionary by the earliest opportunity. Various circumstances
prevented the immediate carrying out of this purpose, and,
we regret to say, the large Mission Hospital at Analakely
still remains closed. We are pleased to learn, however, from
letters recently received from England, that an arrangement
has been completed between the Directors of the London
Missionary Society and the Committee of the Friends’ Foreign
Mission Association, by which the Medical Mission shall be
reopened at their joint responsibility, and that a duly
258 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

qualified medical man is,probably, now on his way to
Madagascar, to undertake the work according to this new
arrangement.*

Fortunately for the natives, who have suffered repeatedly
from severe epidemics during the last few years, just at the
time that our Medical Mission collapsed, the Government
secured the services of two European doctors, and at once
opened a medical dispensary, from which the people are
supplied gratis with such medicines as they may_ require.
Since then a Government Hospital has been commenced,
and a second dispensary has been opened at Ambohimanga,
the ancient capital. In addition to the two European doctors,
several natives are employed by the Government in dispensary
and other medical work. Great good is being done by the
Government by these means, and much praise is due to the
Queen and the Prime Minister for their sympathy with the
people, and the help they have given to them in times of
pressing need.

The people in Antananarivo and the neighbourhood have
also received much help from the two Norwegian doctors,
who are stationed there, and who are indefatigable in their
efforts to benefit the natives. A small hospital in connection
with the S. P. G. Mission has also been of great service to
many, though this is now closed, the nurse who had the
charge of it having returned to England. Since the Medical
Mission in connection with the London Missionary Society
has been closed, the missionaries, both of this Society and
of the F. F. M. A., have done their best, in a small way, to
relieve the sufferings of the people in times of sickness.
Some of them, at their own expense, have given away large
quantities of medicine, but have had repeatedly to regret that
they were not able to do more. Those missionaries living
in the country, and having charge of large country districts,
have been obliged to take a greater share in this work than
others whose duties are chiefly confined to Antananarivo.
Mr. Peill, who for the last six years has had charge of

“ We are happy to be able to add, that since the above was written Dr. _
. T. Fox and Mrs. Fox, sent out under this new arrangement, have arrived
in Antananarivo ; and preparations are now being made for recommencing
the medical work of the Mission at the earliest convenience.
‘TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 259

the large district of Ambohibeloma in the western portion
of Imerina, writes as follows of the medical work which
has been done by himself and Mr. Pickersgill, who for
a short time was associated with him in the work of the
district :—

Previous to our arrival on the scene European medicine was practically
unknown in and around Ambohibeloma. Since that time, the people
have learnt to appreciate its benefits, and now that we have all retired
from the district deeply feel its loss. Being so far away from the Capital
the people will not go there for medicine, consequently many, who might
with ordinary care and good nursing be cured, die of disease. Mr.
Pickersgill and I when we first came out provided ourselves pretty well,
as we then thought, with medicines. Two years after that, we received a
fresh supply of a few of the more commonly used medicines from the
Directors ; and since then I expended upwards of £20 on medicines when
Dr. Davidson was leaving the island. I have.just heard of a fresh and most
liberal supply sent by E. Beveridge, Esq., of Dunfermline, being on its
way to Madagascar. It will be seen from this that a pretty considerable
quantity of medicines of various kinds have been dispensed by us during
the years of our stay at Ambohibeloma. On the whole, remarkable success
has crowned our efforts in this line of work; our very limited knowledge,
helped by the unlimited confidence of the natives in it, and by the blessing

- of God, has proved a great boon to many poor sufferers in this large town
and wide district. We have had some eminently successful operations in
bone setting and minor surgery, while tooth extraction has gone on to any
extent, and called forth many blessings on our devoted heads. All
missionaries sent out to country districts in Madagascar should have
some medical training ere they start. A year to two spent at a hospital
is an immense gain to a man out here, giving him great influence
with the natives: influence which, when wisely used, is beneficial not
only to their bodies but to their souls too. Great numbers of patients
have been supplied with medicine, and a good many cases requiring
careful nursing and bandaging have been attended to with most gratifying
results.

In Vonizongo, a large district in the north-west of Imerina,
a considerable portion of the missionary’s time is necessarily
spent in attending to the sick. The district generally is
unhealthy, and is subject to periodical visitations of malarial
fever. Mr. Matthews, who, for many years, has had charge of
the eastern part of Vonizongo, has given great attention to
medical work. Mr. Stribling also, who, since the return to
England of Mr. Matthews, has superintended the whole dis-
trict, finds much of his time profitably occupied in attending
to the bodily ailments of the people. He writes thus :—
260 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

Medical assistance rendered to the people of Vonizongo since 1872 has
formed an important part of my work. Situated 50 miles from Antana-
narivo, with no means of travelling but on foot, or by palanquin, this
district is too far off for obtaining much assistance from the various
medical men residing there, and the work has devolved upon the
missionaries in Vonizongo. Perhaps no other service could be mentioned
which has been so much appreciated by the general public. Thousands
of people whom I should never have seen at church have been: to our
house seeking help in various diseases, and friendship has thus been
awakened between the missionary and his patients. Wé may hope that
through the assistance received, some interest has been awakened in these
ignorant ones towards that Master in whose name we have rendered them
service. The following figures are sufficient to shew the importance of this

_ part of my work :—The total number who have received medicines from
me from January, 1872, to November, 1879, is 12,320, being an average
number of forty weekly.

Sometimes, also, the native evangelists, as well as the
missionaries, render important service to the people, by
dispensing simple medicines among the sick. Mr. Wills,
writing of one of the evangelists in the Faravohitra district,
says :—

At Fiaferana, the centre of a group of churches pretty near the Capital,
the evangelist, in addition to church and school work, in which he has
been very successful, has given much attention to medical work during the
four years of his residence there. His assistance has been in growing
request by the inhabitants of surrounding villages ; and during the preval-
ence of the epidemic last year (1879) he was requested by the associated
churches to give up his classes for a time, and give his undivided attention
to the sick. There can be no doubt that he has done great good among
the people by his knowledge of medicine (imperfect as it necessarily must
be, as he has had no special training); and his influence as an evangelist
has been increased.

During the time of the severe epidemics, to which reference
has been made in a former part of this Review, all the
missionaries in charge of affected districts, whether living in
town or in the country, felt it a duty, as welt as a pleasure, to
afford all the relief in their power to their afflicted people.
Suitable medicines, when possessed, were freely distributed,
and all possible assistance was heartily rendered. At other
times also the missionaries are frequently appealed to for
help in sickness, so that it is. quite a necessity to keep in
stock a few simple medicines, and the smallest amount of
medical knowledge which the missionary may possess is often
called into requisition.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 261

In Betsileo, the medical department of the Mission has
been more systematically attended to than has been the case
in Imerina, and, we believe, with most favourable results. In
1873, Dr. W. Parker was sent out by the Directors to com-
mence a medical mission in Fianarantsoa. After two years’
service on behalf of the Society, Dr. Parker accepted an offer
from the native Government, and removed to Antananarivo.
The medical work in Fianarantsoa was then taken up by
Mr. Cowan, by whom, with the aid of native assistants, it is
still carried on. The following is a brief account of this
department of labour as conducted in connection with the
Betsileo Mission :—

_ On the arrival of Dr. Parker, this department of mission work was fairly

entered upon, and a small dispensary opened in his house. On the depar-
ture of Dr. Parker for the Capital, the dispensing and medical work was
undertaken by Mr. Cowan. The room formerly used was still retained
until the year 1879, when the house was bought for the use of the Nor-
wegian Mission. Ina short time, however, the rooms for the new dispensary
in the Institute were finished, and the work suffered but little interruption.
From the year 1874 up to 1878, Mr. Cowan was assisted by Joseph and
James, two native youths, sons of one of the town pastors. There are now
six natives assisting and learning in the dispensary, these are youths of
from seventeen to twenty years of age. The dispensary is open every day,
except Sunday, from 9 a.m. until midday. During the past five years over
12,000 people have been attended to in the course of dispensary work. In
addition many have been visited in their homes, or attended to in the house
of Mr. Cowan. The most common cases have been ‘syphilitic, very few
operations have had to be performed, and these have all been of a simple
nature. From time to time various measures have been tried to make the
dispensary self-supporting, but nothing effectual has been accomplished,
except in causing the applicants to purchase the more expensive medicines.
A recent offer of Erskine Beveridge, Esq., of Dunfermline, to help in the
supply of medicines, will to a certain extent relieve the Society of much of
the expense hitherto borne by them in carrying on the medical work in
Betsileo. .

In addition to what is being done in Antananarivo and
Fianarantsoa, and at the various mission stations in Imerina
and Betsileo, a considerable amount of medical work is
done by Mr. Pearse in the Sihanaka country, and by Mr.
Pickersgill in Iboina. Both these brethren attach great
importance to this part of their work, and find it a great
aid to success in the general conduct of their missions.
Mr. Pearse writes :—
262 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

My report would not be complete without a word or two concerning the
medical department of our mission. The success attending this part of
our work has been decided, aud we gratefully record that we have been
able to relieve a considerable amount of suffering, and, in some cases, as
we believe, by God’s blessing, to prolong life. There are, it is true, so-
called doctors among the Sihanaka ; but they have no medical knowledge
or surgical skill whatever ; and although the sick are often beguiled by

‘them into drinking this and that decoction, yet many of those who have
attended our dispensary have not failed to discern the superiority of the
drugs we have been able to dispense; and, as they positively could not
have got the relief elsewhere, we have obtained a favourable prestige
among them, because we have frequently been able to perform slight
surgical operations, and in hundreds of cases to act the part of dentist to
those suffering from toothache. _ The frequent personal contact with the
sick and their friends has, moreover, given us opportunity to speak of
spiritual things, which otherwise we should not have enjoyed, through
which in some cases we are able to recognise that religious benefit has
been received.

Much more might have been done in this department of service had the
missionary been a qualified medical practitioner, instead of being only the
medical friend of the people, and had other duties allowed of more time
being devoted to it.

Our willingness to do what we can for the people, and the principles on
which our small dispensary is worked, are made known to the people in a
handbill, of which the following is a translation :—

i. The missionary is willing to attend to all who seek advice and
medicine from him ; and the days on which the sick are attended to and
medicines dispensed are on the mornings of Wednesday and Saturday
every week.

ii. Anybody taken ill suddenly can have medicine on other days; and
the missionary can be called up at night to attend to any urgent case.

iii. The missionary has no life elixir, and will not deceive those who
consult him by telling them that they are sure to get well; but he will do
what he thinks is best for them, and leave the matter with God, because
He alone is the Lord of life, and it is only His blessing that can restore to
health.

iv. If you have not confidence in the white man’s medicine, and in his
mode of treating the sick, and if you have no sincere intention to carry out
his instructions, do not apply to him: for it is not well to trifle in such
matters, and God hates all lying and hypocrisy.

v. It is from love to God, and from love to man, that the missionary
attends to the sick, and so you have no fees to pay him, nor does he seek
any recompense whatever from you. You should, however, bear in mind
the following : If by God’s blessing you recover, after you are quite well,
it will be becoming if you make an offering of money according as you can
afford to do so, to be spent by the white man in buying medicines for the
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. _ 263

sick who will apply to him in the future, {for God’s Word says :—‘Thou
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.’’ If, however, you are poor and have
nothing to give, do not be at all uneasy in your mind about it.

The voluntary contributions obtained from the people have been liberal
for the Malagasy; but as two of the drugs of which we have had to use
large quantities, viz., iodide of potassium and quinine, are very dear,
they have not met more than about one-third of the expenses. The kind-
ness and liberality of L. Learmouth, Esq., have met the deficiency and
relieved us from all pecuniary embarrassment; and to that gentleman
I acknowledge my obligations, and render my hearty thanks.

Mr. Pickersgill thus describes the importance of the medical
department as a branch of mission work :—

Of the medical department of labour in Iboina a great deal ought: to be
said, which if written I am afraid will appear in the guise of vain regrets
and useless wishes. There is no part of the missionary’s work which is
of greater importance than this, and none for which he is usually sent
forth worse prepared. A few boxes of Cockle’s Pills may do very well to
help a bold traveller to make momentary friendship with men of wild
races, whilst dashing through unknown lands; but when one finds himself
living amongst those who are dependent upon him for all their medical
relief, and sees them suffering and dying needlessly for lack of greater
ability on his part to cure, he comes rapidly to feel how idle it is for good
people, who have been accustomed to the skilled attention of the family
doctor in every little ailment, to speak of the sufficiency of a “‘few simple
remedies’? for all the emergencies of 10,000 lives in the mission field.
Ifthe hearts and minds of these Malagasy are worth the trouble and
expense of sending the Gospel across the ocean to them by trained
messengers, then their sick,and suffering must needs have a claim, in the
Master’s love, upon our overflowing abundance fer a not less well-
equipped auxiliary of compassionateness and healing.
264 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

CHAPTER IX.

THE WORK OF THE FRIENDS’ FOREIGN
MISSION ASSOCIATION.
-.

EPEATED reference has been made in the previous
chapters of this Review to the missionaries and work
of the Friends’ Foreign Mission Association. In our general
church and school statistics, we have included those of the
churches and schools which are under the special superinten-
dence of the Friends; and in estimating the European strength
available for mission purposes, it has been our duty and our
pleasure to include the Friends labouring in Madagascar
among our fellow-workers, and as being, in fact, a part of our
general Mission. Though two distinct societies in respect to
management and support, yet our plans of work are much the
same, and the union which exists among us, and also among
the churches of which, respectively, we have charge, is such
that in the eyes of the natives we are as brethren joined
together in one common work. Since the arrival of the first
Friends in Madagascar in 1867, the pleasantest relations have
prevailed between the representatives of the two societies ; and
we are happy in being able to say that the co-operation and
Christian union were never closer than at the present time.
The new and joint arrangements for the conduct of the
medical mission have tended to draw us nearer to each other.
We believe that this union has been a means of strength to
both parties, and has had a most salutary influence on the
native churches amongst which we thus unitedly labour; and
it is our hearts’ desire and prayer that this friendy co-operation
in Christian work may mever be disturbed, We have much
pleasure in publishing the following account of the work of
the Friends’ Foreign Misssion Association in Madagascar,
which has been kindly prepared by MR. WILLIAM JOHNSON,

Secretary of the Friends’ Committee :—

The interest and sympathy of the Society of Friends in the
great work of evangelisation which has gone on in Madagas-
car dates long before the time when their first missionaries
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 265

arrived in the island. Nor did they hesitate to put that
. interest into practical shape, by subscribing to such part of
the work as especially commended itself to their judgment.

It was on the 1st of June, 1867, that the first “Friends”
arrived in the Capital, where they were cordially welcomed by
the members of the London Missionary Society. Mr. Joseph
S. Sewell had long felt that at some future time the path of
duty would lead him to labour for his:Lord in this country,
and when his companions, Mr. and Mrs. Louis Street, from
the United States, offered themselves for the work, the right
time seemed to have come, and they came out together.

They disclaimed all intention of doing anything to unsettle
the minds of the native Christians on any of the minor points
of Christian doctrine on which their .own views might differ
from those of the missionaries already at work in the island ;
whilst they felt such full unity of sentiment with them on all -
that was fundamental, that a clear field for labour appeared
before them, in which, while being on an independent footing,
they could work by the side of and with those already in the
field, for the one great end of bringing the knowledge of
salvation to this dark land. And so in regard to church
government and organisation, they had no difficulty in accept-
ing what they found already in vogue. Mr. Sewell, in looking
forward to the’work, said :—“There is no divinely authorised
form of church government laid down in the Sacred Writings
for the adoption of Christians everywhere, and in these matters
we are to seek guidance according to the various circum-
stances in which we may be placed.”

Inspired by such sentiments, Mr. Sewell and his colleague
naturally consulted with the missionaries of the L. M. S. as
to the sphere of work in which they could most profit the
Mission generally. At that time the old fetishism of the
country still held the people enthralled, though Christianity
was tolerated ; and the most useful work to which the newly
arrived “Friends” could direct their efforts was in the way of
education, in teaching classes of young men, overseeing
schools already formed, and giving instruction to the teachers.
Thus they found occupation, and for a time also undertook
the care of the L. M. S. Normal School, till a trained master
was sent out from England to take charge of it. The group
of students whom Mr. Sewell collected during this time
became eventually the nucleus of the present school for men
‘ and boys at Ambohijatovo. Mrs. Street also undertook the
charge of a class of young women which had been formed by
Mrs. Hartley, of the L. M. S., and this became the nucleus
266 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

of the present large school for girls and women at Faravohitra.
As time went on, and their familiarity with the language
increased, the Friends found a useful sphere of work in hold-
ing Bible-classes, both in town and country. At one time
Mr. Street had such classes in different places almost every
day in the week.

The sudden expansion of the area of the work claiming the
attention of the missionaries, consequent on the adoption of
Christianity by the Queen and leading people, and the subse-
quent burning of the idols, induced such a great pressure of
work that it became necessary to husband resources and
systematise operations as much as possible, and hence it came
to pass that one church in the city was left without any special
oversight by the L. M. S. missionaries, each straining every
nerve to cope with his own overwhelming burden. Mr. Sewell
was frequently appealed to by the leading members of this
congregation to assist them, which he did in an unofficial way,
till he came to be looked upon as having the regular oversight
of them. It had been hoped that they would unite with the
congregation at Ankadibevava, but being unwilling to do so,
the missionaries eventually acquiesced in the arrangement
made by the people with Mr. Sewell, and Ambohitantely
church has, since 1868, been under the care of the F. F. M. A.

At the first meeting of the Union of the Imerina churches,
held in December, 1868, when the district to be assigned to
the charge of each of the nine town churches was arranged,
Ambohitantely received a district, and was included in that
Union on the same footing as all the other churches.

So matters gradually settled themselves till 1871, when the
staff of the F. F. M. A. missionaries was increased by several
additions from England. It was then felt by Mr. Sewell that
the previous understanding with the L. M. S., which partook
much of a personal character, should be placed on a more
definite and formal footing,—that the F. F. M. A., as a
Society, should be accorded a position and sphere for work
in such a way as should be mutually agreed upon. A propo-
sition to this effect was very kindly entertained by the L.M.S.,
and ultimately, with the agreement of the Directors of the
two societies at home, an understanding was arrived at by
which such a position was accorded to the F. F. M. A.

It was accepted to be worked in harmony with the L. M. S.
It was agreed that Ambohitantely church should be in the
hands of the F. F. M. A., but should be “in union with the
other churches of Antananarivo, bound by whatever arrange-
ment the churches generally have entered into or may here-

‘
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 267

after enter into;” that the churches of the Ambohitantely
district should still be connected with the Congregational
Union of Imerina; and that in matters of doctrine, practice,
and discipline, the L. M. S. could trust the Friends, after four
years’ experience, that they would “abstain from perplexing
the minds of the people by stirring up needless controversies.”

With an increased staff, the F. F. M. A. contemplated
placing a mission station in the centre of their large district,
but difficulties arose about the land for a site, and the plan
was not carried out. After a year or two, however, Mr.
Clemes was settled in the most remote part of it, at Antoby,
and remained there for some three years; when, in consequence
of the decrease of our staff, it became desirable for him to
return to the Capital. With that exception ‘the entire district
has been worked from town.

In 1872, we opened a Printing office at F aravohitra, under
the charge of a printer sent out from England. This proved
a great help to our Mission in rendering the supply of school
books and other needful printed matter more abundant than
was possible with only the previous L. M. S. Press at work.

The visit of the Rev. Joseph Mullens, D. D., and the Rev,
John and Mrs. Pillans to this country was an event of great
_interest and profit to the members of the F. F. M. A. We
‘have always felt that the connection between the two Missions
was much strengthened thereby. We were pleased by being
invited to take part in the conference on matters affecting the
Mission at large, which was held during their stay here, and
joined heartily in its deliberations, in so far as they affected
our mutual work. This Deputation, accompanied by Mr.
Sewell, made a tour through our district, calling at Antoby,
where Mr. Clemes had but recently settled.

It was during the time the Deputation was here, that
the Palace Church took the unexpected step of sending
out a number of the leading students at the L. M. S.
College, with instructions of a general character to do
evangelistic work and take the oversight of schools, in
the country round the Capital. Of these young men, two
were settled in or near the district of the F. F. M. A,,
and though at first we were a little fearful lest they should
be the cause of difficulty in our management of country
schools, or by interference in the churches, we have greatly
rejoiced to find them disposed in every way to work most
cordially with us. Especially has this been the case in the
matter of ‘education, which by their efforts has received a
great impetus ; also in relation to the churches they have
268 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

always acted with wisdom and moderation; and having
received a training as evangelists they have done good
service as such.

We have gladly united with the L. M.S. in fostering a
missionary spirit among our adherents, specially i in connection
with the efforts, which have of late years been put forth by
the Congregational Union, to send out teachers and evangelists
to the still dark heathen tribes. The work is yet only
in its infancy, and has had to pass through much of failure
and loss. Still, it has done good work, and a glorious future
is before it, under God’s blessing.

Our Mission has recently received a visit from Mr. Isaac
Sharp, a minister of the Society of Friends. This visit
occurred in the course of an extensive tour undertaken by
him, with the approbation and support of that Society,
having for its object to visit missionaries and others in out-
of-the-way places, and by word and sympathy to strengthen
their hearts and encourage them in the work to which they
had been called. He had already visited many mission fields,
and had met with L. M. S. missionaries in South Africa and
other countries, so that he was able to tell of people whom
many here knew, and of places and work of which they -had
often heard. He visited all the stations of the L. M. S. both
in Imerina and the Betsileo, and in company of their mission-
aries went further south as far as Ihosy, and to the Tanala
at Ambohimanga. He also visited most of the Norwegian
stations. At these times he always endeavoured faithfully to
fulfil his mission, and whether among the natives or Europeans,
to deliver to his friends such a message as he felt was given
him for them by his Master:

.  Ofthe reception he received by our fellow-workers of other

missions we cannot speak too highly. He could not have
been more warmly welcomed had he been personally known
beforehand ; but, as he often said, the love for the great cause
they had mutually at heart made them feel in a few hours as
old friends.

Mr. Sharp availed himself of every opportunity that occur-
red of addressing the native Christians. He spoke on two
occasions at the meetings of the Congregational Union, and
frequently on Sundays he was invited to address the different
congregations assembled for worship. He made frequent
trips into the F. F. M. A. district on the same errand; and
his knowledge of different countries and people formed a store
of interesting and entertaining information, which was often
drawn on for the benefit of the children in the schools.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. ; 269

His visit has left a good impression on the people. It has
surprised them that one so advanced in years (73 at that time),
should have been willing to undertake so formidable a journey
in the Lord’s work. His kind and genial manner has been
an unspoken sermon on the joy and blessing of God’s service,
and his addresses, as one of the pastors said, found a response
in their hearts.

Ambohitantely Church is situated in the heart of the city,
and near the residences of most of the chief officers. It was
here that the first place of worship in the city proper was
opened in 1864. For some years the congregation only
received partial and irregular oversight from such of the
L. M. S. missionaries as were able to help them, so that
when in 1868 Mr. Sewell undertook the charge of them, they
were in fact the weakest and least satisfactory of all the
city congregations. On the division of the districts, that
which fell to their share was the country lying to the
south-west of the Capital, at that time containing but seven
congregations.

During the time that has elapsed since then, there has been
but little increase in numbers in the town church, the pressing
work having been to raise the standard of knowledge,
and to bring oyt into active exercise in daily life the truths
which were then ignorantly groped after. With advancing _
knowledge has been witnessed an ever-increasing diffidence
in leading the weekly services on the part of many who
at first were eager to be allowed to preach. Most of
the attendants possess copies of the Scriptures, of which
many make diligent use, as evinced by their intelligent
remarks at the weekly Bible-class. Cases of church discipline
are less troublesome than formerly, as the people have
grown in religious understanding, and it is seldom now that
more favour is shewn to the rich and powerful than to the
poor and weak in transacting the affairs of the church. In
private and public morality, the sanctity of marriage, the
purity of home life, the observance of the Sabbath, and the
order of public worship, the congregation at Ambohitantely
has partaken of the general improvement observable among
the people.

Though there are few wealthy or influential people con-
nected with the church, and their monetary transactions are
never very extensive, yet in the care with which they conduct
them they bear favourable comparison with many congre-
270 ‘THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

gations. They raise for church and educational purposes
a regular sum per month, and bear their fair share in the
support of the native missionary society.

Andrianony, the native pastor, was a student in the L. M.S.
College; he early became interested in Ambohitantely,
helping unofficially there from the first, and on the comple-
tion of his course of study was chosen pastor. He has
succeeded in gaining the affection and respect of the people,
and has always worked most cordially with us, giving his
whole heart to the work, and doing his utmost to prosper it,
whether in town or country.

There is a school for little children held in the chapel,
and partially supported by the congregation. There are
sixty-five boys and forty-five girls in more or less regular
attendance. The teaching includes Biblical instruction, the
three R’s, and sewing. The older scholars are drafted off
periodically to our two higher schools.

The District—Before the systematic division of Imerina
into districts for evangelistic purposes, the members of the
Friends’ Mission had interested themselves in helping a few
congregations in the country without reference to their geo-
graphical position, but such as were brought under their notice
by the force of circumstances. At once, however, on the
division being made these were left to the care of those in
whose province they fell, and Mr. Sewell gave his attention
to the district assigned to Ambohitantely. This tract of
country, covering an area of some 2000 square miles, reaches
from the Capital in a south-westerly direction to the unin-
habited waste beyond which lie the tribes of the Sakalava; and
from Lake Itasy to the Ankaratra Mountains. It is bounded
on the north by the district of the Ampamarinana church, and
on the east by that of Ambohipotsy ; while on the south it is
shut in by mountains, beyond which is the populous valley,
the main field of the Norwegian Mission.

There is an estimated population of 200,000 throughout the
district, most dense near the Capital, lying scattered over the
plains and lower hills in Imamo and the Vakin’ Ankaratra
further west, and clustering in innumerable little hamlets,
each with its plots of hemp and fields of rice, along the
streams far into the heart of the mountains.

In 1873, the province of Mandridrano was, by mutual agree-
ment, included in the Ambohitantely district, and since 1874
a group of churches to the north-east of the Ankaratra moun-
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 271

tains have also been more or less under our care, by the
urgent wish of the missionary in charge of the Ampohipotsy
district.

Lying, as our district does, far away from the Capital, and
beyond the reach of foreign influence, it was the last part of
Imerina to come under the spell of the Gospel. It was written
of it ten years ago :—“The only religion was idolatry or a
kind of fetishism ; the country was infested with robbers ;
men-stealing and cattle-lifting were common in the most
western portions; and bull-baiting, witnessed by thousands,
was often a weekly amusement at the close of a market day.
Not a single school was in existence, nor a chapel except at
perhaps.three places.”

The three chapels had become seven when i in 1868 it came
under Mr. Sewell’s charge, and by 1872, soon after the district
was formally made over to the F. F. M. A., the number had
increased to sixty-two with thirty-seven schools. Since that
time there has been further increase, and now there are 118
congregations, with a more or less regular aggregate atten-
dance’ of 18,737 persons, 3358 of whom are church members ;
and eighty-eight schools with 3203 scholars.

To meet the requirements of this growing charge, it became
needful to make such arrangements as would allow of the
various parts of the district being under proper care, till
such time as we were able to place missionaries to reside in
different parts of it. Attempts were made to form a mission
station at Arivonimamo, but unexpected difficulties arose in the
way of this ; and it was not till 1874, that Mr. Samuel Clémes
was able to settle at Antoby, some three days from the Capital,
to take charge of the work in the Vakin’ Ankaratra. It was not
intended to make Antoby a permanent station, but to select a
position farther east when the limits of the sub-district should
become more clearly defined. Before this was accomplished,
however, in consequence of Mr. Sewell’s return to England,
Mr. Clemes’ services were urgently needed at the Capital,
whither he removed after a residence of three years in the
west. Since that time, there has been no missionary resident
in the district for more than a few weeks at a time. It
ultimately became divided into five divisions, each under the
care of a missionary, and each with its district arrangements
for evangelistic and educational work.

These sub-districts are visited regularly by those in
charge of them. That near at hand is visited more than
once a week, besides frequent Sunday visits ‘from all of us and
272 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

the pastor of Ambohitantely ; those in the centre are visited
every month; Mandridrano every two months; and Vakin’ An-
karatra every quarter. At these times the missionary visits
the churches, has opportunities for preaching the Gospel
at the Sunday services and the monthly prayer meetings,
for meeting the teachers, enquiring into their work, giving
them instruction, paying their salaries, supplying their wants
by the sale of Bibles, school-books, and slates, etc.; and,
where able, for ministering to the diseases of the people,
who are willing enough to pay for the medicines received.
At regular intervals of six months, or a year, the schools
are assembled in groups and examined, and printed reports
of the results circulated among the churches.

In this way the whole district is kept fairly under control,
and the pastors, preachers, and teachers have frequent
opportunities of getting the help and advice of the mission-
ary, and he, on the other hand, of knowing how things are
going on, and in what way he can most effectively help his
people.

Arivonimamo, in the F. F. M. A. district, was selected as
the head quarters of one of the evangelists sent out by the
Palace Church in 1874, by name Ralambotsirofo. Being
a man of 12 honours, and well to do, he had great influence
over the people. Mild and conciliatory in all his dealings
with them, of consistent and exemplary life, he gained
their respect, became very popular, and was the means of
very much good. He always worked most cordially with
the missionaries; never taking any important step apart from
them, and being always ready to meet their views in any
way he could. Similar testimony could be borne to the
good sense and friendly co-operation of Andriamananizao,
who, though not settled in our district, had many of our
nearer schools under his control. We regret the removal
of these two men, for other positions. They both gained
our esteem while working with us. Of their successors it
is as yet too soon to judge, but we believe that they
are both sincerely desirous of doing their duty, not only
to the Palace Church which has placed them in their
positions, but also to God, by doing their utmost to advance
His kingdom.

To find teachers for our country schools was early felt
to be a difficulty. Suitable men in the Capital were unwill-
ing to go far away, and youths from our schools could
often do better for themselves nearer at hand. We already
had a few classes specially for men at our school at
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 273

Ambohijatovo; so, to get over our difficulty, we determined,
in 1873, to bring up likely young men from the country,
give them a course of training in town, and, if they proved
capable, settle them out again near their homes as teachers.
This plan has more than answered our expectations; and
now a large proportion of the teachers at work in the
district are such as have received this training. From the
character of the instruction given, they are able to be of real
help to the churches with which they are connected, in which
they frequently fulfil the duties of pastors.

Another difficulty which early beset us was, how to best
give assistance to the country congregations in building
their chapels. Our people are by no means well to do, wood
on that side of the Capital is scarce, and, consequently,
the chapels do not compare favourably with ‘those in other
districts. The four walls of clay were easily put up, and
could have been made straight and true and strong, but
the roof, though only of thatch, presented difficulties. In
Malagasy houses, posts of wood were set in the ground to
support the ridge, so this plan was introduced into the chapels,
where the preacher often found himself immediately con-
fronted by a crooked tree-trunk before the pulpit, the first of
a series extending at intervals the length of the chapel. By
the time the wood for the roof, such as it was, was obtained
and erected, the energies of the people were exhausted; and
the openings already left for doors and windows often
remained as they were, albeit the cold east wind did but too
soon discover the want of casements.

-To systematically give money to help the people was open
to many objections. To give doors and windows to be put
into these wretched hovels was useless, as the roof would fall
in a few years; so we eventually adopted the plan of making
simple principals for the roof, fewer or more as needed,
requiring the people to fetch them from town, when we again
sent out carpenters to erect them. The whole expense per
chapel was about $15. This plan we have followed ever
since; it ensures a good roof of steep pitch which will last,
and the people themselves can easily provide doors and
windows. Tiled roofs and glass windows are as yet a thing
of the future in our district.

In matters of church government, our - arrangements are
much the same as those in vogue in many of the L. M. S.
districts. The church members in each sub-district, convened
twice or three times a year, and presided over by the mission-
ary, form a deliberative assembly by which all important
274 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

matters affecting individual churches are decided. To rest
the management of the church on the people themselves, and
gradually render them independent of the missionary, who
must one day be withdrawn, is our aim. May light and
‘ knowledge spread among them, and render them more and
more fitted to take this important work into their own hands!

Ambohtjatovo School.—The missionaries that our Society
sent to this country came with a deep impression of the value
of a Christian education for the young. They felt that to
influence for good the hearts of the young, to uproot, before
they can strike deeply, old heathen ideas, and to enlarge the
understanding and train the mind to habits of thought, was
indeed to prepare the ground for the more direct working of
the Holy Spirit leading them to God.

Their first efforts were in this direction, indeed the mis-
sionaries already here seemed to wish that they should
more especially concern themselves with the work in the
schools, and the Friends at once agreed with their proposal
that they should collect the teachers of the various town
schools and hold regular classes with them. For some
time also they undertook the charge of the Central School,
which at the time was without regular European oversight
owing to the decease of Mr. Stagg. When, however, Mr.
Barker was sent out from England to take charge of that
school, Mr. Sewell removed with his own class to temporary
quarters, and eventually built, with the kind assistance of
Mr. W. Pool, of the L. M. S., a large school-house at Ambo-
hijatovo, for the education of men and boys. The class
which he had been hitherto training supplied, him with
teachers, when in 1870 he opened the new building. Scores
of young men residing here in town entered as scholars, in
hopes, though late in starting, of making some way in.the
race in ‘which they saw the younger generation ardently
engaged.

Feb. 7th, 1870, was the. opening day, and within a fortnight
there were 197 scholars in attendance, with 70 other names
on the roll ready to enter as way could be made for them.

The want of school-books had been felt from the first.
There was nothing of the kind in existence, except of the
most elementary description. So Arithmetics, Grammars,
Geographies, English Lessons, Scripture Histories, etc., had
all to be made, and were printed at the L. M. S. press.

Ten years have passed since then, and have been occupied
in carrying on and consolidating the work on the lines then
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 275

laid down. With little exception, there has been a steady
increase in the number of scholars, and in the regularity
and punctuality of their attendance. At first we opened our
doors to all who could read, but, as the elementary schools
throughout the Capital became more efficient, the standard
of attainment on admission was raised so as not to interfere
with their work, and now their upper scholars frequently
pass ontous. There is a distinct branch of the school for
the training of suitable young men from the country as
school-teachers. They receive pecuniary help from us while
in town, and pass through a course of study longer or shorter
according to their capacity, and then are settled out in the
neighbourhood of their homes. From this section of the
school we have been able to supply the district with a large
number of teachers, sufficiently competent for the elementary
work which is called for by the schools in the country, and
able to take a useful place in leading the congregations
where they are settled. Their diligence and conduct have
in most cases been very satisfactory. Their wives, having
meanwhile been under instruction at-our girls’ school,
are often able to second the efforts of their husbands. For
the accommodation of these students two rows of simple
cottages have been erected, within ten minutes’ walk of the
school, where many of them reside under the oversight of
one of the teachers, who received several years training in
England in connection with our Mission.

From a knowledge of reading, writing, and the four simple
rules of arithmetic, the scholars in the general school pass
‘up step by step, adding Geography, Grammar, English, and
Drawing, till they reach the senior class taught, by one of
ourselves, where such other branches are taken up as time
allows for. Few, however, reach this class, the majority
drop away from the second or third; but while a. large
number only remain with us for a twelvemonth, many stay as
long as four or five years. So long as they shew capacity for
improvement they are allowed to remain, otherwise they are
assisted in the choice of a suitable means of livelihood, and
advised to make way for others.

For several years an attempt was made to levy a fee of
threepence per month on all scholars whose friends resided
in town, those from the country being exempted. Some few
paid this cheerfully, but so difficult was it to decide under
which class a scholar should be placed, where so many had
both town and country residences, that the practice seemed
to encourage deception, and was at length abandoned. Since
276 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

then no charge has been made; school-books are lent, but
slates, copybooks, and pencils must be found by the scholars
themselves. Except in the learning of passages by rote, the
teaching of Holy Scripture is mostly kept in our own hands,
and consists of two lessons a week, one in either Testament.

In spite of the astonishment of the natives in 1870 on seeing
such commodious rooms erected for school purposes, these
were soon found to be inadequate to our need, and two years
ago we were able to begin considerable additions to them,
which by allowing of more separation of the classes, will
greatly benefit our work.

The total number of scholars admitted since the beginning
of the school has been rather over 1200. What becomes of
them on leaving us is a question of much interest; but to
get very definite information on the subject is not easy. We
can only trace about one in every four. The greater part have
returned home and taken their places as ordinary members
of the community, who obtain their living by trade, or have
sufficient property for their maintenance. They perform their
allotted share of government service either in a military or
civil capacity, and we see little more of them. Of those of
whom we have more certain information, twelve have left us
to enter the L. M. S. Normal School, and thirty-two have
become students in their College for training ministers, sixteen
youths have become printers at the Mission presses, or at
that of the Government; thirteen have entered as medical
students under one or other of the Doctors; nineteen have
become clerks under Government, in town or country; but
by-far the larger number have become teachers. Of these we
have knowledge of eighty-seven. Our own district has
received the greater part of them, though many are also
working in various L. M. S. districts, and a few in schools of
the Norwegian Mission and of those of the Society for the
Propagation of the Gospel.

We meet them in all parts of Imerina, working quietly
according to their knowledge in school and church; and in
far distant and unexpected places we hear of them, diffusing
the light and knowledge of the Gospel where all else is dark
and heathen. ~

Faravohitra Girls’ School.—In the year 1868, Mr. and Mrs.
Hartley, of the L. M. S. Mission, were obliged by ill-health
to leave this country and return to England. The latter had
aclass of young women in whom she was interested, and
whom with their teacher she bequeathed to the care of
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 2977

Mrs. Street. The charge of them was gladly accepted by her,
and her little school found a home for a time in the central
room ofthe house at Analakely then occupied by the Friends.
Later on, however, when the Friends removed to a house at
Faravohitra, a temporary room was put up in their garden,
where the teaching was carried on daily. Ramatoa, the native
teacher, had been a Christian in the dark days of the perse-
cution, she had much interest in her work, and is still with us
filling a useful sphere in the school. She feels the work was
given her by God himself, and hence has declined advantageous
offers of change. The eagerness with which new scholars
flocked to us when we opened the new school-house at Fara-
vohitra in February, 1870, fully justified its erection. From
that time to the present, we have always had over 200
scholars on our books, being as many as we can comfortably
teach, although several other similar schools have since then
been opened in the town.

The practice of early marriages proved at first a sad
hindrance to our work; girls would leave to be married at
thirteen years of age, and we have known instances when
they have not been more than ten or eleven, Often they would
return, after a time, to learn, and, on being shortly divorced
by their young husbands, would marry again, We allowed
them still to learn, but after a second offence declined to
receive them again. With the teachers, of course, we were
much more strict, for if divorced and we found them to blame,
we removed them at once, at the same time encouraging them
to become scholars once more, and by good conduct regain
their characters. This in one case was done with very happy
results. There has been great improvement in these respects
of later years, not unfrequently the girls remain unmarried
till seventeen or eighteen.

These things have greatly tended to shorten the time our
girls have remained with us. There has been a constant
change of scholars, so that during the past twelve years, as
near as we can tell, no less than 1800 have been for a longer
or shorter time in the school. The frequent loss of our
teachers too from the pressure of family cares is very trying ;
sometimes a class will change its teacher twice in a single
session. One or two of the older teachers, however, have
been with us for several years.

The Pilgrim’s Progress formed our first reading-book, the
set being passed on from class to class as they were required,
as were also the slates; there are still half a dozen of the
former and a dozen of the latter in use. As time went on,
278 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

and school-books became more plentiful, we were relieved
of much of the drudgery inherent to teaching without books.

We have made it a rule from the first that our scholars
learn a text of Scripture every morning, and they have thus
learned by heart many passages, including some of the
Parables. This forms a good introduction to more system-
atic Scripture teaching, which is an important part of
our work. The sewing-classes form a useful adjunct to
the school. All the girls learn to sew, and on attaining
proficiency in the use of the needle are allowed to do fancy-
work, many of our old scholars and others keep up their
connection with us by undertaking work of this kind at
home, the sale of which in England covers the cost of
materials, and has also for the last three years been sufficient
to pay the wages of our teachers; so that apart from the
cost of the missionaries in charge of it, and incidental expenses,
the school has been self-supporting.

Our first teacher, Ramatoa, has now the charge of the
class specially devoted to grown up women, many of them
wives of the country students training at Ambohijatovo.
It is interesting to watch the change which takes place
in the countenances of these ignorant women, as their
minds gradually awaken under the influence of care and
teaching, and how those whose powers more readily develope
rise to the top, and are able to take their place in the
general school. Many of them have gone back with their
husbands, and are settled in the little villages in the west,
whence gratifying reports sometimes reach us of their doings.

Many of our old scholars reside in town, where we often
meet with them; some are teaching in the town schools
or those in the country, of whom we have good reports
from time to time, and believe that they are devoting them-
selves to help and benefit their fellow countrywomen ; but
of the greater number we have quite lost sight, especially
when their stay with us was only for a short time. We
know the power of the Spirit of God, and can trust that,
even where we can no longer follow it, the seed sown in
weakness, and infirmity will not be left uncared for, but will
in many hearts be tended and fostered to His praise.

The Printing Office at Faravohitra had its beginning in
1872. At that time the people were still under the influence
of the excitement caused by the sudden acceptance of
Christianity by those in power, and there was an abnormal
demand for books and school-material. For some years
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 279

there was almost more called for than could be supplied by
the two Mission presses, but latterly that demand has very
much fallen off.

With the kind help and advice of those in charge of the
L. M. S. printing office, ours was soon in working order,
and the energies of Mr. A. Kingdon found full scope in
training in his art the score or more boys whom he employed
to help him. He succeeded in giving them a thorough
knowledge of their profession; and the ordinary branches
of printing, bookbinding, and lithography are now success-
fully carried out under such oversight as one of our non-
professional, and otherwise full-handed, missionaries is able
to give.

In those eight years, in addition to a large amount of job
printing, 539,468 copies of miscellaneous publications have
been issued from our press, ranging from simple broadsheets to
books of 700 pages. An illustrated monthly periodical, on the
model of the “Children’s Friend,” with woodcuts from Eng-
land, has been successfully issued for two or three years past.

We find the. lithographic press a useful adjunct to our
office. There is pretty constant employment for a native
draughtsman in preparing drawings for illustrating books,
or maps for use in the country schools.

It is now thirteen years since the Friends joined the
Mission here. From small beginnings their work has grown
and is still progressing, not so much numerically by an
inerease of nominal adherents, for that took place on the
accession of the present Queen and the burning of the idols;
but in a truer understanding of the things that make for
salvation, of the requirements of Christian morality, and of
a more enlightened public opinion, there has been a steady
advance. We have seen in many a sincere dedication of
heart to God and His service, and in many more an earnest
desire to know more fully the way of Life, and a deep
solicitude that their children might grow up in knowledge
and understanding. In this way our district, along with the
whole of Imerina, is advancing gradually and steadily. And
as we look back over the years and see how, with compara-
tively small instrumentality and with little of noise or
startling incident, the change is being effected, and the rays
of the Sun of righteousness are gradually finding their
way through clouds of darkness, ignorance, and sin, we are
constrained to believe that the Spirit of the Living God is
at work here, and reverently to acknowledge that “it is the
Lord’s doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes.”
280 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

CHAPTER X.

THE WORK OF OTHER SOCIETIES. ©
+98

N addition to the London Missionary Society and the
Friends’ Foreign Mission Association, there are three
other Societies who have missions in Madagascar, viz., the
Lutheran or Norwegian Missionary Society, the Society for
the Propagation of the Gospel, and the Roman Catholics. In
order to present to our readers a complete view of all the
Christian work which is being carried on in Madagascar, we
deem it desirable to make a brief reference to the operations
of each of these Societies.

1.—THE NORWEGIAN MISSIONARY SOCIETY.—The Nor-
wegian Mission in Madagascar was begun in 1867, by the
arrival of three missionaries from Norway, who, after spend-
ing a few months in the Capital, settled at Betafo, a populous
district in North Betsileo. This Mission has been repeatedly
strengthened since its commencement, and now consists
of nineteen missionaries, whilst further re-inforcement is
expected shortly. The labours of the Norwegian missionaries
were, for some years, specially confined to North Betsileo.
The district occupied by them is shewn in the Map which
accompanies this Review, the part coloured yellow being
exclusively under their superintendence. In addition to
this, however, they have a representative Church, a Theo-
logical Seminary, a Medical Dispensary, a Central School,
and two Asylums (one for boys and one for girls), in Antana-
narivo. In 1875, they began to extend their operations
towards South Betsileo, thus entering upon ground already
partially occupied by the London Missionary Society; and
from that time they have continued to strengthen their Mission
in that direction. In 1878, they stationed one of their
missionaries at Fianarantsoa, where they have built a chapel,
commenced a school, and opened a medical dispensary. They
have also erected a number of chapels in the immediate
neighbourhood, so that their efforts are now, more or less,
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 281

extended through the larger portion of the Betsileo province..
Besides these labours in the central parts of the island, the
Norwegian Society has also two missionaries stationed among
the Sakalava, on the west coast.

From the first, a friendly feeling has existed between
the Norwegian missionaries and those of the London Mis-
sionary Society. It is impossible for any close co-operation
in general missionary work to exist between the two
societies, on account of the peculiar Lutheran doctrines
of our Norwegian friends, and the exclusive customs of
their Church, the members, of our churches not being
allowed to join in their communion, and our missionaries
and pastors not being at liberty to enter their pulpits.
Still, it is possible for a fraternal Christian spirit to obtain
among us, and we pray that this may never be impaired.
The erection of a Lutheran Church in the Capital seemed,
at first, somewhat ungenerous, and slightly out of harmony
with the original understanding between the missionaries
of the two societies; but this action was deemed necessary
by the Norwegians in the interests of their Mission, and no
great harm has come of it. The opening services of the
Church were attended by ‘most of the L. M. S. missionaries,
though none of them could be invited to take a part. We are
pleased to say that the Norwegian brethren have honourably
abstained from extending their Mission in Imerina, in accord-
ance with a friendly arrangement which was made when
they first arrived in the country. Their action in South
Betsileo has been somewhat different, and we cannot help
regretting that they should not only have established them-
selves in the small town of Fianarantsoa (which was already
almost too crowded with places of worship), but also have
erected a number of chapels in the surrounding neighbour-
hood, and in close proximity with churches already in
existence. We do not, for a moment, question their rzght to
act thus, but we are afraid that unpleasant difficulties may
arise in consequence of these proceedings; and we could
have wished, in the interests of our common Christianity,
that they had seen their way to take up work in some other
part of the country /ess adequately provided with Christian
teaching. Weare aware that the London Missionary Society
282 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

can scarcely be said to have done its duty in the Betsileo
province, but the L. M. S. Mission there has been attended
by peculiar difficulties; and in the hope of more thorough
European superintendence being provided, we think that the
immediate wants of the churches might, to some extent, have
been met by means of native agents under the guidance
of those missionaries who were stationed in the province.
But, whatever mistakes may have been made in the past, we
trust that in all future arrangements for the conduct of mis-
sionary work among the Betsileo, the missionaries of both
societies will be influenced by such a spirit, and guided by
such motives, as shall prevent any unseemly competition, or
interrupt the free expression of true Christian fraternity. We
have much pleasure in publishing the following account of
the work of the Norwegian Mission, kindly supplied by the
Rev. L. DAHLE, the present Superintendent :—

The N. M.S. Mission in Madagascar was begun in 1867,
by the arrival of Messrs. J. Engh and N. Nilsen, and some
months later of Mr. Borgen, all of whom at first stayed in the
Capital for a few months, in order to acquaint themselves
somewhat with the people and their language, before they
went on to the place where they intended to take up their
work. At the end of that year they left the Capital, and
went to Betafo, a village in Vakin’ Ankaratra (North Betsileo),
where they arrived on the 4th of December, and began their
missionary work. In 1869, 1874, and 1875, new missionaries
were sent out from Norway in addition to those mentioned
above. Up to the middle of the past year (1879) twenty-one
Norwegian Missionaries were stationed in the inland of
Madagascar, of whom five were in the Capital, ten in Va-
kin’ Ankaratra, three in the district between the rivers Imania
and Matsiatra (in Manandriana and Ambatofinandrahana),
and three south of the Matsiatra (in Isandra and Lalangina).
But since then, we have lost two missionaries, one of whom
(Mr. Hansen) was obliged to go home on account of ill-
health, and the other (Mr. Pedersen, at Manandona) recently
died. Consequently, the number of the N. M.S. missionaries
in the inland at present is only nineteen; but others are
expected shortly. :

As to the work done and at present carried on by the
N. M. S., I shall restrict myself to the following particulars :
In the Capital we have only a representative church, situated
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 283

at Ambatovinaky (opened 24th of June, 1875), in connection
with which there is a school for boys and girls at the same
place. We have also in the Capital a theological seminary,
an asylum for boys, and another for girls. The seminary
was opened in 1871, and the first students from it were sent
out in 1875. At present it has about twenty students, who
are to pass their final examination about Christmas this year.
The course is five years, of which, however, the first one is
considered a testing year. New ‘pupils are received only
- at the beginning of a course, consequently only every five
years. The subjects of instruction are partly theological and
partly—especially in the two first years—of a more secular
character. Of foreign languages we have up to this time
only taught Greek (New Test.) and Norwegian, and these only
to the most clever of the students. Nearly all thé students
live in the seminary, and are under the constant care of its
superintendent.

The asylum for girls was opened in 1872, and the one for
boysin 1873. The former has at present about sixty, and the
latter thirty pupils. The pupils are generally received at an
age of from four to six years, and kept until they are fifteen.
The object constantly kept in view in these asylums is of
course not only the instruction of the children, but also—and
chiefly—their Christian education, the good influence of
a long stay in a Christian family, and the development of
their religious and moral character.

In Vakin’ Ankaratra we have a schoolmasters’ seminary (at
Masinandraina), with a short course of only two years. The
first twenty pupils Have just finished their course, and are to
be employed as teachers in Betsileo. An asylum for girls in
Vakin’ Ankaratra is shortly to be opened at Fandriana.

Our small printing press at Ambatovinaky was set to
work about two years and a half ago, and has hitherto been ~
conducted only by natives and on a small scale. Amongst
the publications issued from it, I may mention the first part of
the “Confessio Augustana,” an epitome of our Ritual, or
“Book of Common Prayer,” a new edition of our Catechism,
a third edition of our Hymn-book, a small devotional manual,
a small church history, a Malagasy Grammar, and two
Geographies (a larger one for the teachers and the more
advanced pupils, and a smaller one for beginners). A
Malagasy “Reading-book” is in the press, a small Greek—
Malagasy Lexicon for the New Testament is ready for
printing, and a Malagasy—Norwegian Lexicon is preparing.
284 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

As to our general missionary work out in the country, I
give below the names of our stations, the year when the work
in each of them began, and the name of the missionary at
present occupying them :— '

Station. When begun.| Missionary in charge.

VAKIN’ ANKARATRA:

S$ ( Ambohimasina 1870 Rev. Egenes.

E Soavina 1870 Rev. Wilhelmsen.

é Betafo 1867 Rev. J. Engh,

E  stacinandraina 1869 Rev. Vig.

g ( Sirabe 1869 Rev. T. Résaas.

: | bohintarv 1870 Rev. N. Nilsen.
Manandona 1870 Rev. Nygaard.
Tlaka 1875 Rev. Békker.

i Sandriana 1871 Rev. Studland.

P | sabotin 1873 Vacant.

BETWEEN THE IMANIA AND
j THE MATSIATRA:

§ ( Fihasinana | 1875 Rev. Mfnsaas.

4 | reson 1876 Rev. Hansen.*
Ambatofinandrahana 1875 Rev. T. Nilsen.

SOUTH OF THE MATSIATRA:

g {nee 1876 Rev. Hasland.

E Isoatanana 1877 _ | Rev. Lindo.

Fianarantsoa 1878 Rev. Valen.

As to the progress of our work, our success has been very
different in the various places,—best in some of our older
stations in Vakin’Ankaratra (as Ambohimasina, Betafo, Sirabe,
Soavina, and Fandriana). Being by principle and experience

* Absent on sick-leaye. —
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 285

very cautious in admitting people into our churches, we
have only been able to receive a small number into church
membership. The total number of our church members is
therefore only about 1400. The number of pupils at present
attending our schools is between 6000 and 7000, and the
average number of the people who congregate in our churches
on Sundays is about 12,000. Our native agents (teachers
and preachers) are about 150 to 200. The active opposition to
our work is dying away, but the more passive one, of course,
still continues.

Besides this inland mission; we have also had, since 1874,
some missionaries on the coast. They were originally four, ’
but as the Revs. Valen and Lindo were obliged to repair
inland, because they could not stand the climate on the
west coast, we have at present only two left, viz., Rev.
Rostoy, at Tolia (near St. Augustine’s Bay), and Rev. Jakob-
sen, at Morondava. They also tried to occupy two other
places, viz., Ranopasy (south of Morondava), and Manja
(further inland), but had to give them up again. They have
been successful in baptising some few Sakalava, and have
gathered around them a school of from twenty to forty pupils
each. Two other missionaries for the west coast are just
now on their way from Norway. Owing to the unhealthy
climate in many places on the west coast, and the unsettled
state of the political and social life almost everywhere there,
the prospect of our Sakalava mission cannot be considered a
bright one; but where the darkness is such as it is in these
parts of the country, one feels thankful even for being
permitted, by God’s grace, to throw in some feeble sparks of
heavenly light here and there.

2.—THE SOCIETY FOR THE PROPAGATION OF THE GOSPEL.
—In 1870, when our last Ten Years’ Review was written, the
Church Missionary Society and the Society for the Propaga-
tion of the Gospel had missions in Madagascar. The former
was represented by three missionaries, and had two stations
on the east coast: one at Vohimaro to the north (commenced
Nov., 1864); the other at Andovoranto, about two days
journey south of Tamatave (commenced Nov., 1866). The
Society for the Propagation of the Gospel had one missionary
stationed at Tamatave. This Mission was commenced in
August, 1864. At that time, strenuous efforts were being
made by the Committee of the S. P. G. to strengthen and
286 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

extend their mission in Madagascar by the appointment of a
bishop and staff of clergy, who were to reside in the Capital,
and commence missionary operations in the districts already
occupied by the London Missionary Society. This was in
direct opposition to the mutual arrangement made in 1862 by
Bishop Ryan, of Mauritius, as representing the Church of
England, and Mr. Ellis, as representing the London Mission-
ary Society, viz., that the L. M. S. should be left in undis-
turbed possession of Imerina, and that the Societies represented
by Bishop Ryan should establish missions at Tamatave and
among the coast tribes. The proposal of the S. P. G. to place
a’bishop in Antananarivo was an act of direct aggression on
the work of the London Missionary Society in Imerina,
and was felt by all sections of the Church to be out of harmony
with those Christian principles which ought to regulate the
proceedings of Missionary Societies in their conduct towards
each other. It was also seen that the carrying out of such a
- proposal would be calculated to disturb the minds of the native
Christians, who were just being brought to a knowledge of the
Gospel, by introducing among them diversities of doctrine
and new forms of worship. The Church Missionary Society
honourably declined to be a party to such an ungenerous
proceeding, and determined on withdrawing their missionaries
from the island should the proposal of the S. P. G. be carried
out. The subject was warmly discussed in the religious news-
papers and periodicals, of the time, and the proposal to send
a bishop to Madagascar was universally condemned. A
prolonged correspondence took place on the subject between
the Archbishop of Canterbury, Earl Granville, Dr. Mullens,
Secretary of the London Missionary Society, and others, °
but without finally preventing the appointment of a bishop

for Madagascar according to the wishes of the Committee

of the S. P. G. The Archbishop made an application,

through Earl Granville, for the Queen’s license to consecrate

a bishop for Madagascar, but this was declined. Earl’
Granville, in his reply to the Archbishop, said :—“It would

be neither desirable nor expedient to proceed to the creation

of the proposed bishopric, or to move Her Majesty to grant

a license for the consecration of a bishop whose advent in

the island would be calculated to produce schism in the
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 287

Anglican community, and therefore have an injurious effect
on the conversion of the heathen inhabitants of that country.”
The “post” was also offered by the Archbishop to several
clergymen of the Church of England, who, after being made
acquainted with all the circumstances involved, declined to
accept it. At last, however, the Rev. Robert Kestell
Kestell-Cornish, M.A., of Corpus Christi College, Oxford,
late Vicar of Landkey, Cornwall, accepted the appointment,
and, at the request of the Archbishop of Canterbury, was
consecrated by the Scottish Bishops, on the 2nd of February,
1874, as bishop for Madagascar. In the same year, Bishop
Kestell-Cornish, with four assistants (one of whom was
returning to Madagascar), left England for his new bishopric.
The missionaries of the Church Missionary Society, who had
laboured in the island for seven or eight years, were
withdrawn from Madagascar, that Society not agreeing to
the conditions on-which the bishop was appointed.

In the meantime, mission work in connection with the
S. P. G. had been commenced in Antananarivo. In the
early part of 1872, the Rev. A Chiswell, who had been in
charge of the mission at Tamatave, paid a visit to the
Capital, and commenced holding services. He also formed
classes for young men, and did his best to secure the influence
of some of the chief families in favour of his proselytising
efforts, A little later, two or three village stations were
formed, through the influence of a man who had been
expelled from one of our churches for adultery and general
bad conduct. After the arrival of the bishop, efforts were
made to extend the S. P. G. Mission* in Imerina. In addi-
tion to the temporary church which had been opened on
the east side of the Capital, another was erected near the
large weekly market; two schools were commenced in the
Capital, one for boys, and one for girls; a small children’s
hospital was opened, and placed under the superintendence
of a European nurse; a college for the training of native
catechists has also been commenced at Amboatany, near to
Ambohimanga, the ancient capital, where a stone church,

* This Mission is always represented to the natives, by the S. P. G,
missionaries as the Church of England Mission.
288 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

and other mission buildings are being erected; and per-
haps, a dozen village stations have been established in
different parts of Imerina, many of which are in the same
villages, and in close proximity, with churches under the care
of the London Missionary Society. Were the operations of
such different societies in the same field of labour, and the
unsightly spectacle of opposition churches standing side by
‘side in the same village, the result of intelligent and con-
scientious scruples on the part of the natives, one could have
some sympathy with the present state of things in Imerina;
but when it is remembered that all this is the result of the
unfriendly proceedings of a section of English Christians,
who, uninvited, have pressed their services upon the natives,
we cannot but feel that the name of Christ is dishonoured,
and the cause of truth greatly hindered, by such undesirable
exhibitions of sectarian Christianity.

As to the success which has attended the efforts of the
S.P.G. missionaries, we have not much to say. It has evidently
not been such as they were, at first, led to expect, and we
believe they are disappointed with the results, though their
reports do not say so. So far as we are able to judge, the
success of their efforts in the country consists as much in
impairing the work of others as in advancing their own.
Several of their teachers are young men who were formerly
in connection with the L. M. S. Mission, but were suspended
or expelled from church fellowship on account of unchristian
conduct ; and many of their village stations have been formed
by means of persons of like character, who have left our chur-
ches under similiar circumstances. One of our missionaries,
writing of the agents of the S. P. G. in his district, says :—

In every place where they effect an entrance they simply do harm to us
by unsettling the minds of the people, without making any real progress
themselves.

Another writes :—

The S. P. G. have been invited more than once by dissatisfied members
of our congregations and churches to establish places of worship. Attempts
have been made, but hitherto without success. An intriguing spirit is
still rife among some of the natives, which manifests itself on any occasion
of special church discipline or difficulty, and which is fostered by the hope
of still being able to introduce discord and schism. It seems a grievous
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. . 289

thing that English money, and the lives of educated English gentlemen,
should be available, either directly or indirectly, for the fostering of so
mean and unchristian a spirit.

3-—THE JESUIT MISSION.—The Roman Catholics have the
honour of being the first of any Christian Society who sent
missionaries to Madagascar. Their first missionaries were
stationed on various parts of the coast, and on the adjacent
islands. Their first mission in the island was at Fort
Dauphine on the south-east coast, but this was long ago
withdrawn. The Jesuit Mission in Antananarivo dates from
the year 1862, when the London Missionary Society’s Mission
was also re-established. Their Mission at Tamatave was,
we believe, also commenced about the same time. In 1870,
or the beginning of 1871, the Jesuits commenced a Mission
in Fianarantsoa. These—Antananarivo, Tamatave, and Fia-
narantsoa—are their three centres of operation, and they
have a strong Mission at each place. It is impossible for us
to give any statistics of their Mission, or even to give the
total number of the priests, laybrothers, and sisters. In the
Betsileo province, there were nineteen agents (male and
female) a few weeks ago, but they are frequently changing.
In Imerina there is a much larger number, and in Tamatave
there are, perhaps, four or five. The total number cannot
be less than about fifty. .

In Antananarivo, the Jesuits have four large chapels, one
of which ought, perhaps, to be dignified with the name of
Cathedral. This is a large stone building situated at the
west of Andohalo in the city, and is the finest place of
worship in the Capital. It has not yet been formally opened,
but seems to be nearly completed. It has two towers, one at
each corner of the front, and in the eastern tower is a clock
with two dials, one to the north and another to the east.
There is a fine circular window in the centre of the front,
and above this window, on the apex of the front gable, stands
a full-sized image of the Virgin, which is an object of wonder
to the natives. The Jesuits have four or five large schools in
the Capital, and a printing press, which appears to be well
worked, considering the number of devotional and other pub-
lications which are constantly being issued. In 1870, they
290 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

had not more than twenty outstations in the island, but now
they have this number in Betsileo alone, and in Imerina they
have been equally aggressive during the last few years. They
are now putting up chapels in nearly every important village
in the country, with what intent is not easily seen, except it
be in the hope of a speedy revolution in their favour, and of
checking the influence of Protestantism.

Notwithstanding all these aggressive efforts, they do not
seem to gain much hold on the adult portion of the population,
and their congregations are usually very small. They have
more success with the children and young people, partly on
account of the small presents which they freely distribute
among them; but even this success is seen more in the evil
effects on our schools than in any increase in theirs. We
have already referred, somewhat at length, to the intrigues of
the priests, and to the various means made use of by them to
accomplish their ends. It is not necessary that we should
here repeat what has been said in a former part of. this
Review. Believing, as we do, that the spread of Roman
Catholicism will not be for the permanent good of the country,
we desire that Protestant teaching may be increased, and
that such superintendence may be provided for the churches
throughout the land as shall protect them from the wily
influence of the Jesuits, and save them from the erroneous
doctrines they are seeking to propagate.

JEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 298

CHAPTER XI.

ENGLISH MISSIONARIES.
£963
HE number of English missionaries in connection with
the Madagascar Mission at the close of 1870, including
those then absent in England, was seventeen. Ofthis number,
fifteen belonged to the Imerina staff, and two were appointed
to Betsileo. Fourteen of these were ordained missionaries, |
and the remaining three were, a builder, a schoolmaster,
and a printer. This represents the whole strength of the
Madagascar Mission at the beginning of the present decade,
and includes two missionaries who were then in England.

Since then, great changes have taken place. The staff of
English missionaries has, from time to time, been increased
by new missionaries sent out from England; whereas,
some have died, and several others have left the Mission.
Since 1870, eighteen new missionaries have joined the
Madagascar Mission ; but, on the other hand, six have left
the Mission and three* have died, leaving an increase
.of nine, and making the present number of Madagascar
missionaries Twenty-six. Of the eighteen new missionaries
sent out by the Society during the ten years, four left
England in 1871, four in 1872, six in 1873, one in 1874,
two in 1875, and one in 1879. In addition to these, Miss
Bliss was sent out in 1876 to take charge of the Girls’
Central School in Antananarivo, and Miss Cockin in 1879 to
take charge of a similar institution in Fianarantsoa. Of the
twenty-six male agents of the Society now connected with
the Mission, twenty-two are married. We would again
remind our readers that the missionaries of the Friends’
Foreign Mission Association are working in friendly co-opera-
tion with those of the London Missionary Society, though their
efforts are confined exclusively to the Imerina province.

* The three deaths here referred to are those of the Rev) .T. Wesley,
the Rev. T. G. Beveridge, and the Rev. R. Toy: Mr. Wesley died in
Madagascar, after six months’ residence in the island; Mr. Beveridge,
with his wife and two children, perished in the wreck of the ‘‘Cashmere,’’
when on his return to England ; and Mr. Toy died at sea, also on his wa’

home. Mr. Cameron’s death is not noted here, as he was not in full
connection with the Society.

)
292 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

It is necessary to take this fact into consideration in endea-
vouring to form an estimate of the real strength of the Mission.
The accompanying table will shew the number of English
missionaries, male and female, 2% connection with the Mada-
gascar Mission at the close of each year from 1870 to 1880.

Agents of the F. F. M. A. in friendl
Date. Agents of the L. M. S. co-operation with the L. M. S.
Male. Female. Male. Female.

1870 , 17 16 ‘ 2 2

1871 21 18 4 4

1872 24 21 5 7

1873 30 27 6 8

1874 30 27 6 8

1875 30 26 6 8

1876 30 28 5 Z

1877 27 25 5 6

1878 26 23 5 5

1879 27 25 4 5

1880 26 24 4 5

The following table will shew the number of English mis-
sionaries, male and female, actually resident in Madagascar
at the close of each year from 1870 to 1880. The difference
between these two tables will give the number of mission-
aries absent, either on sick-leave or furlough, at the end of
each year.

; {Agents of the F, F. M. A. in friendl
Date. | Agents of the L. M. S. 3B co-operation with the L. M. S. y
Male. Female. Male.* Female.*

1870 15 16 2 2

1871 18 17 3 4

1872 20 20 4

1873 28 25 5 7

1874 27 24 6 8

1875 27 25 6 7

1876 28 27 5 6

1877 26 24 4 5

1878 25 22 4 4

1879 22 19 4 4

1880 20 17 4 4

* The numbers given in these columns are the same as those given on_
page 104, the agents of the F. F. M. A. being all resident in Imerina.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. — 293

From the first of these tables it is seen that the highest
number of L. M. S. missionaries, at any one time connected
with the Madagascar Mission is thirty, whilst from the second
table it is seen that the greatest number ever reszdent in the
island, at the same time, is twenty-eight, and this has only
occurred twice, viz., in 1873 and 1876. The number of English
missionaries connected with the Mission at the present time
is nine more than in 1870, but the number actually resident
in the island, when we write this Review, is only five more
than it was ten years ago. The average number of male
agents in connection with the Mission during the last ten
years is a little over twenty-six, but the average number of
those resident in Madagascar at the close of each year, and
available for the work of the Mission, is only a little more
than twenty-three. The average number of female agents is
somewhat below this mark.

Several changes have been made in the appointments of
missionaries during the last few years. Mr. Pearse and Mr. —
Pickersgill, who formerly laboured in Imerina, have been
removed to form new missions at Ambatondrazaka and
Mojanga. Mr. Baron, also a member of the Imerina Mission,
has been labouring for the past two years in Fianarantsoa.
Some of the missionaries, originally appointed to the Betsilea
Mission, have also been transferred to Imerina. Various
other changes have from time to time taken place, as the
health of the missionaries, or the exigencies of .the Mission,
seemed to direct.

The present staff of English missionaries in Madagascar
is far from sufficient to do the work which needs to be done.
Literary work, and some of the educational establishments
in Antananarivo and Fianarantsoa, have recently suffered
much on account of insufficient attention, and the want of
more constant superintendence. Most of the districts in
Imerina are much too large to allow of ample supervision by
the missionaries in charge, especially as a great deal of the
time of some of them is taken up by extra duties, caused by
the absence of brethren in England, and other circumstances.
The schools throughout the country are suffering most sadly
for want of more systematic inspection and more constant
294 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

supervision. The Betsileo Mission has been nearly destroyed
by the intrigues of the Jesuits, and much harm has been done
to large churches and schools in Imerina by the same means;
but a great deal of the evil might have been prevented had
there been a larger number of earnest missionaries to look
after the flock and protect it from the ravages of the enemy.
The churches are still weak, even the strongest of them, and
cannot yet be left to the sole care of the native pastors and
evangelists. If European superintendence be diminished
now, nay, if it be not speedily increased, much of the good
which has resulted from the teaching of the missionaries in
the past will be lost for ever, and the churches will fall
irrecoverably from that faith and order in which they have
been trained. We wish the Directors and all our friends to
know that the time is yet far distant when the number of
English missionaries in Madagascar can be safely diminished,
and that it is absolutely necessary to the well-being of the
churches and the prosperity of Christ’s kingdom that the
number be at once increased. In addition to the great demand
for more missionaries in Imerina and Betsileo, there are yet
many large tribes to the east, west, north, and south of us,
who are living in heathen darkness. We wish to carry the
Gospel to these tribes, and though we look to the native
churches to afford much help in this glorious work, yet it
cannot be left to them alone, and with our limited strength we
cannot, we dare not, undertake more than we have on our
hands at present. We trust, and pray, therefore, that the
Directors, and the Christian public in England, will come to
our help, and complete the work they have so well begun,
and which God has so abundantly blessed, in Madagascar.
The number of male agents of the Society resident in the
island should never be allowed to fall below thirty. There
is work for forty, or even more; but we know that the re-
sources of the Society are limited, and that other missions have
also claims upon the consideration of the Directors, and we
would not be extravagant in asking for more than the work
imperatively demands. But with the pressing needs of the
churches, the aggressive efforts of the Jesuit priests in all
parts of the country, the still dense ignorance and gross
superstition of many of the people in the central provinces,
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 205

and the numerous tribes still destitute of the Gospel, ever
before our eyes, we cannot hold our peacé until our cry is
heard, and the help for which we call is provided.*

In addition to the loss of six missionaries, who, for various
reasons, have left the Mission during the past ten years, the
Mission has also sustained several losses by death.

Though not a Madagascar missionary, yet we cannot omit
a passing reference to the lamented death of the Rev. Dr.
MULLENS, the late Foreign Secretary of the Society. In his
death, the Madagascar Mission, in common’ with many others,
and, perhaps, more than same, sustained a heavy loss. His
recent visit to the island had not only increased his informa-
tion, but had deepened his interest in the Mission, and had
also made him known and respected by a large number of
the native Christians. We fear it will be long before any
one occupying the same influential position can possibly have
an equal acquaintance with the details of our Mission, and
take the same interest in all that concerns its welfare.

The death of the REv. W. ELLIS, on the 9th of June, 1872,
is an event which was not without its influence on the Mada-
gascar Mission, and demands a record in this Review. Mr.
Ellis may be fairly classed among the Madagascar mission-
aries, for though he left the island in 1865, after about three
years’ residence, his interest in the Mission, and his efforts on
its behalf, did not cease till his death. We have referred to
his work and influence in a former part of this Review,t and
all that it is necessary for us to do now, is to give his name a
place in the obituary of the Mission.

A further loss was sustained both by the Mission, and by
Madagascar as a nation, in the death of Mr. JAMES CAMERON,
which took place on the 3rd of October, 1875. Mr. Cameron
first came to Madagascar in September, 1826. He was thus
one of the earliest band of missionaries, and took a prominent
part in the first efforts to civilise and Christianise the |
Malagasy. He taught the people many useful arts, and

* By last mail we received information that two new missionaries are
now on their way to Madagascar. For this we are devoutly thankful ; and
we trust we may soon hear that others are to follow them.

+ See pp. 60 and 61.
296 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

shewed them how to utilise many of the resources of their
country for the purposes of their daily life. After nine
years’ residence he left the island in 1835, on account of
the hostility of the then reigning sovereign to all Europeans,
especially to the religion they had come to teach. When
the country was again open ta Europeans, and to Christian
teaching, Mr. Cameron was among the first to return to
Madagascar, where he spent the remaining portion of his
life in most useful and active service, partly in connection
with the Mission, and partly also in connection with the
native Government. He died at the age of 76, highly
respected, not only by all the European residents, but also
by the Queen, the Prime Minister, and the natives generally,
on account of his excellent character, and the good he had
done in the country.

The REv. J. T. WESLEY was sent out by the Society in
1875, and appointed to labour in the Sihanaka province.
As the Sihanaka Mission was then being newly formed,
Mr. Wesley was advised to remain in Imerina for a few
months, so as to have better opportunity of learning the
language. Whilst here, his health failed, and, to the regret
of all who had witnessed his earnest and self-sacrificing
spirit, he passed away on the 19th of December, 1875, having
been only between five and six months in the island, and
before he had seen the station to which he had been appointed
by the Directors.

Further sadness of feeling is revived as we recall the
melancholy circumstances attending the death of the Rev.
T. G. BEVERIDGE, who, with his wife and two children, was
lost at sea, when on their return to England. Mr. Beve-
ridge left England in 1872, and after five years’ residence
in Madagascar (during the last three of which he had been
in charge of the Tsiafahy district), he found it necessary to
return home. He, his wife, and their three children, were
strong and well when they left the island, and they were
looking forward with joyful anticipations to meeting their
friends and relatives in England. But their hopes were
never realised. Onthe 5th of July, 1877, the “Cashmere,”
the steamer in which they were making the voyage, became
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 297

a total wreck near Cape Guardafui, and all were lost, except
one of the children. Mrs. Rogers, the wife of another of
our missionaries, and one child, were also lost in the same
wreck.

The most recent painful event to which we have to refer is
the death of the REv. R. Toy, which took place at sea, on
the 19th of April of the present year (1880), when, with Mrs.
Toy and their youngest child, he was returning to England.
Mr. Toy had so recently left us, and had for many years
been so closely associated with us in mission work, that it
is difficult to realise the fact that he has now gone to the
better country. In writing of Mr. Toy we feel that we are
writing of one of ourselves. He was the senior of the first
lot of missionaries, who left England in 1862, sent by the
Directors to re-establish the Madagascar Mission, after the
long reign of persecution. In 1863, a few months after his
arrival in the island, Mr. Toy, with a few native Christians
who gathered around him, formed the Ambohipotsy Church
at the south end of the Capital, which has now grown into
one of the most influential churches in the city. He con-
tinued to labour in connection with this church, and in the
increasingly large district associated with it, until 1870, when,
on account of failing health, he returned to England under
medical certificate. After spending three years in England,
his health was deemed sufficiently restored to enable him to
return to Madagascar. On his arrival in Antananarivo in
1873, he at once commenced his duties as one of the tutors
in the College, a position to which he had been appointed
previous to his visit to England in 1870. Teaching was his
great delight, and he threw his whole soul into the work,
frequently to the injury of his health. He was extremely
conscientious, and sensitive to a fault, in the discharge of
what he considered to be his duty. He was never physically
strong, and repeatedly suffered intensely from severe nervous
headaches. He has often continued his classes in the College
with his head tightly bandaged to suppress the pain, and
gone straight to bed immediately his duties for the day were
ended. But, notwithstanding his continued ill-health, he did
a great deal of work of various kinds. In addition to his
duties as tutor in the College, he had charge of one of the
298 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

city churches with a small district attached, was for two
years a member of the Bible Revision Committee, and took
an active part in general literary work. He wrote several
books in the native language, which will be lasting memorials
of his unwearied labours and his diligent study. In the death
of Mr. Toy, the Mission has lost one of its most earnest
missionaries, and Madagascar has lost one of its warmest
friends.

In addition to the deaths among the male agents of the
Society, already recorded, eight ladies, all of them wives of
missionaries, have, during the ten years, been called from their
earthly life of toil to join in the service above. Of these,
five died in Madagascar, two were lost at sea, and one died in
England. The names of these ladies, with the dates of their
decease, are given in the following table. It is not desirable
to attempt to describe the desolate hearths, the comfortless
homes, ‘the darkness which has, from time to time, been cast
over the Mission, and the- aching hearts of friends and
relatives in England, which have been caused by the death
of these wives and mothers. All this can be more easily
imagined than expressed.

Fifteen children of the Mission families have also. been
removed by death within the time now under review. This
fact, too, represents an amount of sorrow which can only be
understood and appreciated by those who have witnessed it,
or who have been called to pass through similar trials
themselves. The presence of the Saviour is the chief conso-
lation of his servants in all such times of grief, as well as
their strength and encouragement in all their efforts to extend
His kingdom ; and He has said: “Lo, I am with you alway,
even unto the end of the world.”
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 299

TABLE SHEWING THE LENGTH OF SERVICE OF EACH
MISSIONARY WHO HAS BEEN CONNECTED WITH THE
MADAGASCAR MISSION WITHIN THE LAST DECADE.

2 Ee:
fg $24
Bee | (es
Name. Station. Robe | se EI
: ge | Ea
A Az
- Cameron* Antananarivo (Imerina) 1826 & 1863) 1875
. Toy . »” ” 1862 1880
W. E. Cousins ” ” ”
- Parrett ” ” *
. Briggs ” » 1863
. Pearse Imerina and Antsihanaka »
. Cousins Antananarivo (Imerina) 1864
. Sibree Ambohimanga _,, 1863 1877
. Pool Antananarivo ” 1865
C. Jukes ” ”» 1866
arker 1 » 1868 1872
. Richardson |Betsileo and Imerina 1869
. Wills Antan. and Ambohimanga (Imerina) 1870
. G. Peake Antananarivo and Isoavina ,, ”
'W. Montgomery|Antananarivo » ”
T. T. Matthews |Vonizongo ” ”
C. F. Moss Antananarivo » ”
IW. Attwell Fianarantsoa (Betsileo) ” 1874
T. Brockway j|Ambositra ” 1871
G. A. Shaw Fianarantsoa ” »
E. H. Stribling |Vonizongo (Imerina) ”
. A. Houlder |Tsiafahy ” »
. W. Grainge |Antananarivo ,, 1872
T. G. Beveridge|Tsiafahy ” ” 1877
R. Baron Imerina and Betsileo ”
J. C. Thorne {Antananarivo (Imerina) ”
Lf. Lord ” ” 1873
W. C. Pickersgill|[merina and Iboina »
. Peill Ambohibeloma (Imerina) ”
. W. Parker /Fianarantsoa (Betsileo) ”» 1875
. Riordan Ambohimandroso ,, ” 1878
. Rogers Betsileo and Imerina ogy 1877
W. D. Cowan |Fianarantsoa (Betsileo) 1874
C. T. Price Fanjakana ” 1875
J: T. Wesley |Antsihanaka 1875 1875
. Rowlands |Ambohimandroso (Betsileo) 1879
Miss Cameron* |Antananarivo (Imerina) 1872 1876
Mrs. Hogg y ” 1877 1879
Miss Bliss ” ” 1876
Miss Cockin Fianarantsoa (Betsileo) 1879

* Mr. and Miss Cameron were only partially connected with the Mission.
THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

300
ENGLISH MISSIONARIES IN 1880.
Sige Date of arrival
Name. seni in Madagascar. Station. Department of Labour.
a

W. E. Cousins | 1862 |Aug. 9, 1862|Antananarivo {Bible Revision
J. Parrett 1862 |Aug. g,1862|Antananarivo [Mission Press
B. Briggs 1863 |May 29,1864|Antananarivo |Ampamarinan.D.
J. Pearse 1863 |Oct. 7, 1863|Ambatondrazaka Sihanaka Dst.
G. Cousins 1864 Aug. 14,1864|Antananarivo |The College
W. Pool 1865 |July 17, 1865|Antananarivo {Building
C. Jukes 1866 |Aug. 16, 1866|Antananarivo |Ankadibevava D.
J. Richardson® | 1869 |June 8,1869|Antananarivo _|Normal School
J. Wills* 1870 |June 5,1870|Ambohimanga |AmbohimangaD.
P. G. Peake* 1870 June 5, 1870|[soavina Isoavina Dst.
W. Montgomery*| 1870 July 15, 1870 Antananarivo |Ambohipotsy D.
T. T. Matthews*| 1870 July 15, 1870
C. F. Moss 1870 |Sept. 1, 1870|Antananarivo |AmbatomangaD.

| T. Brockway 1859 [July 14, 1871 Ambositra Ambositra Dst.
G. A. Shaw 1868 |July 14, 1871|Tamatave District work
E. H. Stribling | 1871 [July 14, 1871|Fiarenana 'Vonizongo Dst.
J. A. Houlder | 1871 |July 14, 1871|Tsiafahy Tsiafahy Dst.
H. W. Grainge | 1872 |Aug. 13, 1872|Antananarivo _|Andohalo Dst.
R. Baron 1872 Nov. 10, 1872|Antananarivo _ [Palace Schl, etc.
J. C. Thorne 1872 |Nov. 10, 1872|Antananarivo ) |Superintendents
T. Lord 1873 {July 18, 1873|Antananarivo of Schools.
W. C. Pickersgill} 1873 |Oct. 25, 1873/Mojanga Iboina Dst.
J. Peill 1873 |Oct. 25,1873|Antananarivo |The College
W. D. Cowan | 1874 |Sept. 30, 1874/Fianarantsoa _|District work, etc.
C. T. Price 1875 |July 26, 1875/Ifanjakana N.W. Isandra D.
Miss Bliss 1875 |June 29, 1876/Antandnarivo _|Girls’ Central S.
J. Rowlands 1879 |Aug. 25, 1879|Ambohimandroso|S. Iarindrano D.
Miss Cockin 1879 |Aug. 25,1879/Fianarantsoa = |Girls’ Central S.

* In England.

TEN YEARS’ REVIEW.

DEATHS OF MISSIONARIES FRoM 1870 TO 1880.

By

the Society.

Date of arrival in

Madagascar.

Name.

Date of a
pointment

Station.

Date of decease,

‘Mrs. Moss
William Ellis
‘Mrs. Baron
‘Mrs. Thorne
James Cameron
rs. Pool .
‘J. T. Wesley
(Mrs. Thorne
T. G. Beveridge
‘Mrs. Beveridge
Mrs. Rogers
Mrs. Baron
(Robert Toy

Sept. 1, 1870
yore 16, 1862*
ov. 10, 1872
Nov. 10, 1872
Sept. 6, 1826
uly 17, 1865
uly 26, 1875
ept. 20, 1872
Nov. 23, 1872

1870
1815
1872
1872
1826
1865
1875
1876
1872
1873
1877
1862

Oct. 28, 1873
June 18, 1877.
Aug. 9, 1862

Antananarivo
Antananarivo
Antananarivo
Antananarivo
Antananarivo
Antananarivo
Antsihanaka
Antananarivo
Tsiafahy

”
Ambatomanga
Fianarantsoa
Antananarivo

April 16, 1874
not

Ov. 4, 1875
Dec. 19, 1875
Mar. 29, 1877
July 5, 1877

uly 25, 1878
eal 19, 1880

an. 28, 1871
une 9, 1872
ay 9, 1873

3, 1875

»”?

DEATHS

FROM 1870 TO 1880.

OF CHILDREN OF MISSION FAMILIES

Name or Parentage.

Date of decease.

Age.

‘A daughter of the Rev. T. Brockway
A son of the Rev. W. Montgomery

A son of Dr. G. W. Parker —

A son of the Rev. R. Toy

A son of Mr. T. Lord

A daughter of the Rev. T. G. Beveridge
A son of the Rev. C. Jukes

A daughter of the Rev. J. Richardson
A son of the Rev. J. Pearse
A daughter of the Rev. J. Riordan

A daughter of the Rev. T. Rogers
A son of the Rev. T. Rogers

A son of the Rev. T. G. Beveridge
A daughter of the Rev. T. G. Beveridge
A son of Mr. J. C. Thorne

Sept. 22, 1871
EY 16, 1873

eb. 4, 1875
Dec. 23, 1875
March 4, 1876
futy 24, 1876

uly 22, 1876
March 16, 1877
May 14, 1877

1877

5, 1877
5, 1877

5, 1877
23, 1877
17, 1877

June

j

uly
Ang.
April

uly
uly

2 days
11 days
6 days
6 days
11 months
5 days
2 years and 7
months
1year and 3
months
2 months and
21 days
3 years and 6
months
10 months
2 years and
I month
9 years
7 years
5 months and

7 days

“BOR 9B 4807

* This is the date of his arrival in Antananarivo on his last visit, which

extended over three years.
302 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

CHAPTER XII.
PROSPECTIVE WORK.

+0 £964
HOSE of our readers who have taken the: trouble to
follow us through the previous chapters of this Review,
and have given attention to the statistics and numerous facts
that have been presented, shewing the progress of the Mission in
its various departments, will be prepared to acknowledge that,
under God, a great work has been accomplished in Madagascar
by the agents of the London Missionary Society and those
who have been in friendly co-operation with them. In this
Review, our attention has been specially confined to the work
and events of the past ten years, but it must not be forgotten
that much of the fruit, which has been recently gathered, is
the result of many years of toil and foundation-work, in the
previous history of the Mission. For fifteen years (1820-1835),
the early missionaries were labouring incessantly in the island
amid great difficulties and discouragements, and it was then
that the foundation of the Church of Christ in Madagascar
was laid. Though the longed-for results of their arduous
labours did not immediately appear, but seemed rather to be
effectually prevented by the enemy, yet the work that was
accomplished at that time was destined to produce abundant
fruits in future years. The seed of the Kingdom, which was |
sown by these first missionaries in reducing the native
language to writing, in translating and circulating the Word
of God, and in preaching the Gospel to all who were willing
to listen to it, germinated, and sprang up, and grew, during
the long years of persecution that followed; and when the
missionaries arrived in 1862 to recommence the Mission, they
found that the seed, which at first was but as a grain of
mustard seed, had become a comparatively large tree, under
whose branches many earnest disciples had found shelter
and rest. According to a native calculation, there were
twenty-five congregations with 740 church members and
7ooo native adherents, ready to receive the missionaries
on their arrival, and anxious to profit by their teaching.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 303

From that time till 1868, the work of evangelisation
was carried on without intermission, though sometimes in
the face of manifest disapproval on the part of those in
authority; and the Gospel slowly spread through the
country, and became a power in the hearts of many of the
people. But it was not till the accession of the present
Queen in 1868, that all obstacles were removed, and the
Gospel had free course through the length and breadth of the
land. Then, the missionaries were, for the first time, at liberty
to organise such institutions as they deemed necessary to the
permanent interests of the Mission. It was not, however, till
170, that many of these institutions were brought into efficient
working order; and from this it will be seen, that it is chiefly
within the last ten years that the results of missionary work
in Madgascar have been specially manifest. These results,
so far as they can be handled and tabulated, have been
-presented in the preceding pages of this Review. Briefly
summarised they are as follows :—

(2) In regard to general church life, we behold these results
in the 1142 Congregations, with which are associated 604
Native Pastors, 124 Evangelists, 4134 Native Preachers,
71,585 Church Members, and 244,197 Native Adherents,
which, together, have raised, within the last ten years, for the
evangelisation of the country and general mission work,
the sum of about £40,000. In these congregations there are,
also, 26,217 adults who are able to read, and 38,090 Bibles
and Testaments. One of these congregations assembles in
a handsome and appropriately finished Stone Building,
erected by the Queen within the precincts of the Palace,
and in which Her Majesty is one of the most constant and
devout worshippers. Four of the congregations meet in large,
substantial, stone Churches built in memory of the martyrs,
on, or near, the spots where they suffered and died for
their Saviour. Two hundred of them worship in neat brick
chapels, some of which have tiled roofs and glass windows,
and in other respects also are suitably finished; and though
the rest are, at present, provided only with clay or rush build-
ings, some of them, we are sorry to say, doorless, windowless,
and almost roofless, yet, erelong, we hope to see them more
becomingly accommodated.
304 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

(4) The fruits of missionary work in educational matters,
we find in the 862 Elementary Schools, containing 43,904
scholars, 25,586 of whom are able to read, besides being
considerably advanced in writing, arithmetic, and other
branches of useful knowledge. We also rejoice in the 109
trained Evangelists which have been sent forth by the
College, and in the 120 School-teachers who have been
trained in the Normal School, and are now scattered
through the country in discharge of their educational duties.
The greater intelligence and improved manners of the young
women and girls of Antananarivo also shew the good that
has been done by the Girls’ Schools, and by the various
efforts of the ladies of the Mission in the interests of
female education. The suitable and commodious Educational
Buildings, such as the College, the Normal and Boys’
Schools, the Girls’ Schools, and the Congregational Schools,
which are now to be seen in the Capital, are marks of the
growing interest in education, and of the great progress it
has made during the last few years. The generally improved
tone in the social life and conversation of the people, and |
their more refined tastes with regard to dress and other
matters, are also pleasing evidence of the happy results of
advancing education.

(c) In literary work, also, there has been great progress.
In the Revision of the Malagasy Bible, in the circulation
of 132,902 Scriptures, and in the more than 2,000,000
Publications, which have issued from the L. M. S. and
F. F. M. A. presses since 1870, there is manifest proof, not
only of the activity of the missionaries, but also of increased
intelligence on the part of the natives, and of a greater thirst
for Biblical and general information.

(d) It has also been seen that something has been done to
extend the blessings of the Gospel beyond the limits of
Imerina and Betsileo ; and from the newly-formed missions
in the Sihanaka and Iboina provinces, as well as from the
stations recently occupied by native evangelists, we receive,
from time to time, encouraging evidence that the work of the
Lord is prospering.

(e) In addition to these special results of missionary work,
there are others, which, though less direct, are never-
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. | 305

theless, unmistakable proofs of the power of the Gospel.
The reformation which has taken place in the laws of
the country, and the more just and impartial administration
of these laws; the amelioration in the system of govern-
ment service; the more merciful treatment of criminals,
and the more Christian conduct of military expeditions,
when found to be necessary to the peace and prosperity of
the kingdom; the liberation of all foreign slaves; the
repeated attempts to suppress bribery, polygamy, divorce,
drinking, and other moral evils; the improvement in the
houses, and in the general condition of the people, with
many other reforms which are evident to every one who has
spent many years in Madagascar, are all, we believe, the
unquestionable results of Christian teaching, and of the hold
which the:'Gospel has secured on the hearts of many of the
people, and, more especially, of the rulers of the country.
Such, then, is some of the work already accomplished in
Madagascar; but much more remains to be done in this
great island, before the existing churches are perfected in
the knowledge of the Gospel and the whole of the people are
made acquainted with the Saviour. We trust our readers
will not think for a moment that because so much has been
achieved little remains to be done, and that the native
churches may be safely left to carry on and complete the
work of evangelising the rest of the country. Such a con-
clusion would be a great mistake. The labours of English
missionaries in Madagascar have hitherto been chiefly,
though not entirely, confined to the central provinces of Ime-
rina and Betsileo, and the results of missionary work
hitherto recorded are, almost exclusively, such as are to
be found in these provinces. Even here, however, a great
deal that presents itself'to the eye is superficial, and we are
frequently reminded that ‘all is not gold that glitters.” The
statistics we have quoted above may, perhaps, be misleading
to those of our readers who do not take the trouble to look
below the surface. Ifit be supposed that because a man is a
church member he is a true Christian, or that because he is
an adherent of the Mission he is perfectly acquainted with
the saving truths of the Gospel; if it be imagined that the
4134 native preachers are all workmen that need not to be
306 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth, and that each
of the 604 native pastors is thoroughly furnished for every
good work, in every respect blameless, and suitably qualified
for all the duties of his office; then, statistics may be mislead-
ing, and they had better not be given. But, if the character
of the native pastors and preachers be considered in the light
of the explanations already given in this Review, then there
will be no fear of any one being led astray, or of a wrong
impression being produced with regard to them. And if it be
remembered that the large majority of those who are connected
with the Mission as church members or adherents were, a very
few years ago, immersed in heathen darkness and superstition,
and that many of them have only joined the churches be-
cause it was fashionable to do so, then it will be understood
that many of the so called churches are imperfect, and that
many years’ teaching will be required before the people in
these central provinces have attained to that knowledge of
the truth, which shall make them free from all their super-
stitious notions and heathen practices.

But, leaving the character of these native churches and
adherents, which are, to some extent, within our reach and
placed under Christian instruction, we wish it to be under-
stood that these embrace but a small part of the population
of Madagascar, and that there are yet many tribes and
millions of people in the island, who have no knowledge
of the Gospel of Christ. Even in the central provinces of
Imerina and Betsileo, not more than one-fourth of the popu-
lation can be said to be receiving any religious training. We
belive the 244,197 adherents to represent, pretty nearly, the
aggregate attendance at the places of worship in associa-
tion with the L. M. S. and F. F. M. A. Missions; and, in
addition to these, there are perhaps forty or fifty thousand
more who consider themselves to be nominally connected
with us, but who have not been included in our statistics.
But notwithstanding this, there are at least three-fourths of
the people in Imerina and Betsileo who are still living without
God, and ignorant of the way of salvation. And even if ample
provision were made for the evangelisation of these central
provinces, there would still be much remaining to be done
before the whole of Madagascar would be put in possession
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 307

of the Gospel. The provinces of Imerina and Betsileo are
undoubtedly the most important, and perhaps also the most
thickly populated parts of the country; still, they form but a
very small portion of the whole, and some of the distant
tribes cover a much larger area, and are, probably, much
more numerous than the Hova and the Betsileo. We have
no means, at present, of ascertaining the exact population
of Madagascar, or of comparing accurately the size of one
tribe with another. The estimates which have been formed
of the entire population of the island have varied between
two and a half millions and five millions. The truth probably
lies, as is usually found in such cases, between the two
extremes. We have repeatedly received reports, both from
native and European travellers, which have led us to conclude
that some of the distant parts of the island must be more
thickly populated than has often been supposed. We think,
therefore, that we may safely reckon the population of
Madagascar to be at least four millions ; and if this estimate
be correct, there are still more than ¢hree mzilzons of people in
the island who have no knowledge of the Saviour.

We would call the attention of our readers to the Map
which forms the frontispiece to this Review, and for which
we are indebted to Mr. W. Johnson, of the F. F. M. A. It
is designed to correct the erroneous opinion of some people
in England that Madagascar is now a Christian country, by
shewing the comparatively small portion of the island which
is under the influence of Christian teaching. The coloured
spaces in the map represent those parts of the country which
are more or less provided with Christian teachers; while
the blank spaces represent the dark places of the land, which
are as yet unvisited by the saving light of the Gospel. The
parts coloured 427k shew the districts Occupied by the agents
of the London Missionary Society and the Friends’ Foreign
Mission Association, the lighter shade representing the portions
occupied by the former, and the deeper shade that occupied
by the latter. The part coloured yed/ow represents the district
occupied by the Norwegian Missionary Society. The stations
of native evangelists on the east coast and in other parts of
the country are underlined with red; and the thin red lines
shew the missionary journeys that have been taken during the
308 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

last ten years. The Jesuits are to be found in nearly all the
places occupied by the agents of the L. M. S., especially in
Imerina and Betsileo; and the S. P. G. have several stations
in Imerina and on the east coast, but they have no special
district of their own.

A glance at this map will shew the comparatively small
portion of Madagascar which has, as yet, been brought
under the influence of the Gospel. We have already stated
that with few exceptions—and even these are of a recent
date—all Christian efforts have hitherto been concen-
trated in the central parts of the island; whilst the large
and numerous tribes on the east, west, north, and south,
have been almost entirely neglected. Whilst using all the
means in their power to build up and strengthen the churches
already in existence, to send the Gospel to all these heathen
tribes, as soon as circumstances will allow, is the great work
which the missionaries have before them. To accomplish
this will, necessarily, be the work of many years, and will
involve a large expenditure of strength and funds; but it isa
glorious work, and is worthy of every needful sacrifice. As to
the way in which the work should be proceeded with, experience
has shewn us that it would be unwise to place teachers among
some of the more distant tribes, before the nearer districts
are occupied. But there are some places where missionaries
might be stationed at once, with great advantage to the
churches and the country, and many others which might be
occupied by native evangelists, so as to prepare the way for
still further extension. The immediate want is men, of
the right stamp, to occupy the fields which are white already
unto the harvest. Tamatave, and the populous districts on the
south-east coast, and also Ihosy, in the north of the Ibara
country, ought to be supplied with English missionaries. All
these places have, for a time, been worked by native evangel-
ists, and are ripe for more advanced teaching and more
thorough superintendence.*

* Since writing the above, we have been informed by the Directors that
Mr. G. A. Shaw, who has spent several years in Betsileo, and is now re-
turning to Madagascar after taking furlough in England, has been appoint-
ed to Tamatave as his future station. The wants of this important sphere
of labour will thus be met, and we trust that much good will result to the
large Betsimisaraka tribe.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 309

Any wide extension of the Mission, however, cannot be
effected without additional missionaries, as the present staff is
scarcely adequate for the work in the central provinces; the
first requirement is that the districts already occupied should
be efficiently superintended, so that the existing churches
may be more firmly established in the faith, and the inroads of
the enemy prevented. When the vacancies in the Imerina
and Betsileo Missions, which have been caused by deaths and
removals, are filled up, then the missionaries will be able to
take into serious consideration the further extension of the
Mission among the distant tribes.

There are several things connected with the work in these
central districts, which we feel to be of the utmost impor-
tance to the Mission and to the country at large, which
require the earnest attention of the missionaries, and need to
be constantly kept in view in all our missionary operations.
Some of these may be briefly mentioned, for the information
of the Directors and friends of the Society in England.

1.—One of the things demanding serious attention, and
which must occupy a large share of the missionaries’ time in
the future, is /zferary work. The great importance of this
work is evident from the advance which education has made
during the last few years. The constantly increasing number
of educated evangelists and young men from the College, of
trained school-teachers and other youths from the Normal and
general schools, and of the adults and children throughout
the country who are able to read, makes it imperative that
more time and attention be given to the preparation of a
native literature. The Malagasy have no literature of their
own, and are at present incapable, unaided, of producing
any. It has all to be provided for them by the missionaries.
Much has been done in this direction during the last ten
years, but recently the work has been somewhat held in
abeyance, on account of the fewness of the missionaries, and
the préssing claims of other duties, which could not be neg-
lected. It is to be hoped that greater advance will be made
in this department of work during the next few years, for
except suitable books be provided for the people, much of the
time now spent in teaching will be lost, and the teachers will,
to some extent, have laboured in vain.
310 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

2.—Another important matter, much to be desired in the
interests of the churches, isa hzgher standard of Scripture
knowledge on the part of the country pastors and preachers.
The very limited-knowledge possessed by the majority of these
Christian workers has already been stated in this Review,
and the statement need not be repeated here. The importance
of Biblical knowledge on the part of those, who, Sabbath
after Sabbath, minister to the people who meet together in
our country chapels is evident to every one; and it is
often matter of deep regret that so many of them are so
inadequately qualified for the work. A high degree of
attainments in the present condition of the churches is not
absolutely necessary, but a thorough acquaintance with the
fundamental truths of the Gospel is indispensable to the
profitable preaching of the Word, even to the most ignorant
congregation. It is impossible for many of the country
pastors and preachers to attend classes at the College in
Antananarivo, or even at the mission stations in the country ;
and as most of them receive no remuneration for their services
in the churches and have to provide a livelihood for themselves
and their families, it is further impossible for them to attend
classes at all, except about once or twice a week. All that
can be done for the majority of them, therefore, is to hold
weekly classes in central parts of the various districts, and to
give such instruction and hints as may help them in their
private study of the Scriptures and their public ministrations.
This is our universal practice, and both the missionaries and
the native evangelists take part in this work. Progress is
necessarily slow, but a great deal of good has been done in
this way; and there has been a decided improvement in the
preaching of the natives during the last fewyears. By continued
application to this mode of teaching, and with such other
help as can be given by means of practical commentaries, and
elementary books on theological and other Biblical subjects,
we may hope that still further progress will be made, until a
sufficient number of young men have been trained in the
College to supply the places of the present pastors.

3.-— We also desire to see a higher tone of spiritual life in the
churches, both in town and country. There is great need of
this. Religious duties seem to be performed as mere matters of
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. Bil

form and custom. We should like to see greater prayerfulness
among the churches, and a deeper and more earnest spirit in
connection with Christian worship and Christian work gener-
cally. To promote this higher Divine life among the native
Christians must be the object of our constant prayers and
unceasing efforts. We have no doubt that the very imperfect
knowledge of many of the people in regard to the nature and
requirements of true religion has much to do with the form-
alism which we see in many of the churches. So far as this
is the cause, it can only be removed by the continued teach-
ing and preaching of the Gospel. As, however, true spiritual
life is the gift, of the Spirit of God, all that we can do will be
ineffectual without His presence and power; but these, we
know, have been promised in answer to prayer.

4.—The zndependence of the churches of all secular and
external patronage and control, we also regard as a matter
which needs to be constantly kept in view, and to be guarded
as a sacred right. The missionaries have ever been mindful
of the right of the churches to manage their own affairs, and
have been watchful against any infringement of this pre-
rogative. During the past ten years, this subject has at times |
occupied a great deal of attention, and, occasionally, there has
been cause for anxiety. Latterly, however, there has been
no sign of any wish, on the part of those in authority in the
island, to interfere in the affairs of the churches, except it be
by petty officials in some country villages to which no impor-
tance whatever can be attached. We would not say, however,
that all danger is past, and that there is no further need for
watchfulness in this matter. The nature of the Malagasy,
the national tendency to centralisation, and the servile
disposition of the people generally, are still unchanged, and,
in the absence of the missionaries, would be sure to shew
themselves in ecclesiastical as in political affairs. Still, we
believe the danger to be less than it was some years ago, and,
with the continued presence and judicious influence of the
English missionaries, we have no need to fear any retrograde
movement.

5.—Turning from the churches to the schools, we are anxious
to see a better system of education adopted by the Govern-
312 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

ment, and impartially enforced throughout the country. This
educational question has already been referred to at con-
siderable length, and our difficulties in connection with it
have also been put before the reader. From what has been
said, it will be evident, that the work of elementary education
can only be carried on successfully by the aid of the Govern-
ment. We have neither funds nor influence sufficient to
enable us to carry on the work, as it ought to be done,
without such help. The majority of the people decline
to send their children to school without pressure from the
Government. The Queen and Prime Minister have given
great assistance in this work during the past few years,
and it is chiefly by means of their influence that so much
progress has been made. This influence, however, has been
exerted locally, and spasmodically, and has not been uni-
form through the country. There has been no system, and
no educational laws, by which the action of the Govern-
ment could be regulated. These spasmodic and irregular
efforts, for the first two or three years, did much good,
and gave great stimulus to education; but latterly they
have landed both the Government and ourselves in such
difficulties, especially with the Jesuit priests, as have obliged
us to decline any further assistance until a definite system of
education be adopted to be applied to all alike. The whole
question, with its numerous difficulties, has been faithfully
represented to the Prime Minister, and for several months we
have been hoping that something would be done in the
matter. His Excellency sees the difficulties in which the
question is involved as well as we do, and is anxious to
secure the best means of overcoming them. We believe he
is carefully preparing a scheme, but hitherto nothing has
been publicly said about it. Our present duty appears to be
to wait as patiently as possible, trusting that in course of time
our patience will be rewarded. We cannot, however, let
the matter finally rest, until some satisfactory measure be
adopted.

(6) The last subject to which we refer, one which is destined
to take a prominent place among the social and political
reforms of the future, and on which the native conscience
needs to be still further educated, is s/avery. We have
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 313

already explained the kind of slavery that at present exists
in Madagascar, and have stated our opinion as to the course

which it seems to us prudent to adopt with regard toit. Our

only object in referring to the matter now is to place it

among those subjects which need to be kept in view as im-

portant questions of the future. There can be no doubt that

the time is coming when slavery will be entirely abolished

in Madagascar, but it is desirable that the people should be

better educated, and that several other social and political

reforms should be effected, before the grand event takes place. .
The subject of slavery is beset with great difficulties, and can

only be approached with the greatest care and prudence. At

the present time, it is impossible to speak about it in public,

or to write about it in any of our periodicals or other books to

be circulated among the natives, without producing a most

undesirable excitement. The question, moreover, is so closely

mixed up with the politics of the country that it seems to us

unadvisable for the missionaries to take a very conspicuous

position with regard to it. Still, it isalso a question which is

covered by the broad principles of the Gospel, and is not always
to be suppressed by the Christian teacher. Whilst, under
present circumstances, it would seem unwise to go out of our
way to attack the evil, yet when it comes in the ordinary

course of one’s teaching, it cannot be overlooked, or passed

byin silence. The direct teaching of the Gospel, however, in

the present sensitive state of the native conscience, will be

more powerful than any arguments of the missionary, and

will make a much deeper impression. This teaching is

already working, and, in God’s time, will produce its destined
results.
314 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

LIST OF ENGLISH BOOKS AND PAMPHLETS ON
MADAGASCAR PUBLISHED SINCE 1870.

The Translation of the Malagasy Bible. By the Rev. W. E. Cousins,
Missionary L. M.S. F. F.M.A. Press. Antananarivo. 1873.

Recollections of Mission Life in Madagascar during the early days of
the L. M. S. Mission. By Mr. James Cameron. F. F. M. A. Press.
’ Antananarivo. 1873.

Proceedings of a Missionary Conference held in Antananarivo, in Jan-
uary, 1874. F. F. M.A. Press.‘ Antananarivo. 1874.

Notes of a Journey to Antsihanaka and back. By the Rev. J. Sibree,
Missionary L. M.S. F.F.M.A. Press. Antananarivo. 1874.

From Fianarantsoa to Mananjara: Notes of a Missionary Journey. By
Mr. G. A. Shaw, Missionary L. M.S. F. F. M. A. Press. Antanana-
rivo. 1874.

Twelve Months in Madagascar. By the Rev. Joseph Mullens, D. D.,
Foreign Secretary of the London Missionary Society. London. 1875.

The Sakalava: Notes of a Journey from Antananarivo to some towns
on the Border of the Sakalava Territory, in June and July, 1875. By Mr.
Joseph S. Sewell, Missionary F. F.M. A. F.F.M.A. Press. Antana-
narivo. 1875.

From Fianarantsoa to Ikongo: Notes of a Missionary Journey. By Mr.
G. A Shaw, Missionary L. M.S. F. F.M.A. Press. Antananarivo.
1875.

Joseph S. Sewell and his work in Madagascar. By Mr. Henry E.
Clark, Missionary F. F.M. A. F.F.M.A. Press. Antananarivo. 1876.

South-East Madagascar. By the Rev. J. Sibree, Missionary L. M. S.
F.F.M.A. Press. Antananarivo. 1876. .

Remarks on Slavery in Madagascar, with an address on the subject

delivered at Antananarivo. By Mr. Joseph S. Sewell, Missionary F. F. M. A.
London. 1876.

Some Remarks en writing Malagasy. By Mr. Louis Street, Mission-
ary F. F.M. A. F. F. M.A. Press. Antananarivo. 1876.

A Reply and a Justification: A Critique on ‘‘Some Remarks on writing
Malagasy.’’ By the Rev. J. Richardson, Missionary L.M.S. L.M. S.
Press. Antananarivo. 1876.
TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 315

The Malagasy Language: A Paper read before the Philological Society.
By the Rev. W. E. Cousins, Missionary L. M.S. London. 1876.

North-East Madagascar: A Narrative of a Missionary Tour. By the
Rev. J. A. Houlder, Missionary L.M.S. L. M. S. Press. Antanana-
rive. 1876.

An Ancient Account of Madagascar. Translated from the German.
With Introductory notice by the Rev. J. Sibree, Missionary L. M. S.
F. F. M. A. Press. Antananarivo. 1877.

Lights and Shadows: or Chequered Experiences among some of the
heathen tribes of Madagascar. By the Rev. J. Richardson, Missionary
L.M.S. L.M.S. Press. Antananarivo. 1877.

The Church in Madagascar. Reprinted from the Friends’ Quarterly
Examiner. By Mr. Henry E. Clark, Missionary F. F. M.A. London.
1878.

The Church in Madagascar: Reports of the S. P. G. Mission, for 1874—
1879, and 1877—1878. London.

The Madagascar Mission: A Statement in reply to Recent Criticisms.
_ By the Secretary of the Imerina District Committee. L. M. S. Press.
Antananarivo. 1878.

Three Years of Mission Work at Andovoranto, East Coast, Madagascar.
By the Rev. H. W. Little, Missionary S. P. G. Mauritius. 1878.

The Antananarivo Annual for 1875, 1876, 1877, and 1878. L. M. S.
Press. Antananarivo. ‘

Madagascar: The Great African Island. By the Rev. J. Sibree,
Missionary L. M. S. London. 1879.

Reports of the Madagascar Mission for 1876, 1877, 1878, and 1879.
I.. M. S. Press. Antananarivo.

Reports of the Friends’ Foreign Mission Association (referring principally
to Madagascar) for each year from 1871 to 1880.

316 THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

IMERINA DISTRICT COMMITTEE.

te

1880—1881.
4

OFFICERS OF COMMITTEE.

Rev. C. F. Moss. ice csseseceeeeees ceceee .. Chairman.

Rev. B. Briggs....cccsceceeeeee seecececece Secretary.

Mr. J. C. Thorne ......... ccc e cee cee e eee: Treasurer.

Rev. H. W. Grainge . - .

Rev. J. Peill..... . \ seen eee eee sees see Auditors.
—=>0O<S0

MEMBERS OF STANDING SUB-COMMITTEES.
EXECUTIVE.
Rev. W. E. Cousins, Rev. B. Briggs, Rev. J. Pearse, Rev. C. F. Moss,
and Mr. J. C. Thorne.

‘

FINANCE.
Mr. J. Parrett, Rev. B. Briggs, Rev. C. Jukes, Rev. C. F. Moss,
Mr. J. C. Thorne, and Mr. T. Lord.

EDUCATION.
Rev. B. Briggs, Rev. G. Cousins, Rev. C. Jukes, Rev. C. F. Moss, Rev.
H. W. Grainge, Mr. J. C. Thorne, Mr. T. Lord, and Rev. J. Peill.

PUBLISHING.
Rev. W. E. Cousins, Mr. J. Parrett, Rev. B. Briggs, Rev. G. Cousins,
Rev. C. F. Moss, and Mr. T. Lord.

MEDICAL MISSION,
Rev. B. Briggs, Rev. G. Cousins, and Rev. C. F. Moss.

IsaAN-ENIM-BOLANA.
Rev. J. Pearse, and Rev, H. W. Grainge.
‘TEN YEARS’ REVIEW. 317

BETSILEO DISTRICT COMMITTEE.

tt
1880—1881.

tt

MEMBERS OF COMMITTEE.*
Rev. T. Brockway, Rev. W. D. Cowan, Rev. C. T. Price, Rev.
T. Rowlands, and Miss Cockin.

063

OFFICERS OF COMMITTEE.

.

Rev. T. Brockway ............ Chairman and Treasurer.
Rev. C. T. Price.......-...... Secretary

Rev. C. T. Price . .
Rev. T. Rowlands } cee eee eens Auditors.

FRIENDS’ FOREIGN MISSION ASSOCIATION.

———0. 05 00-—--—

THE following are the missionaries of the FRIENDS’ FOREIGN MISSION
ASSOCIATION, labouring in friendly co-operation with the missionaries of
the LONDON MISSIONARY SOCIETY :—

Mr. H. E. Clark, Mr. W. Johnson, Mr. S. Clemes, Mr. W. Wilson,
Miss Gilpin, and Miss Pumphrey.

* Changes are in contemplation, which may materially alter the consti-
tution of this Committee.
318

THE MADAGASCAR MISSION.

NATIVE PASTORS AND EDUCATED EVANGELISTS.

Date of
Name. leaving Position. Church or District.
College.
Andriambelo — Pastor | Amparibe Church.
Andrianaivoravelona | 1873 » Ampamarinana Church.
Rainimanga —_— ” Ambohipotsy Church.
Rainijesy 1873 ” Faravohitra Church.
Rainibao » ” Analakely Church.
Ratsiarovana ” ” Andohalo Church.
Andrianony ” ” Ambohitantely Church.
Rabe 1874, ” Ankadibevava Church.
Rajaonary. —_ ” Ambatonakanga Church.
Razaka —_— ” Fihaonana Church.
Rainisoa — ” Sambaina Church.
Ravelo 1874 Evangelist | Ambatonakanga District.
Ranizafinia 187 ” ” yg,
Rainitsimba 1879 ” » ”
Rasoavelo ” » ” ”
Andrianifahanana* 1878 » Ambohidratrimo District.
Ranaivo* 1878 ” » »
Rajona 1876 ” ” ”
Radofa 1877 ” s ”
Ralaiseheno 1873 ’ ” ‘ ”
Rainidonia 1878 ” » ”
Rambelo*. 1878 ” Analakely District.
Rakotovao* ” ” ” ”
Rahanetra 1877 ” ” ”
Rainisolofo 1878 ” ” ”
Ratsimba 1879 ” » ”
Ranaivoramboarina* | 1878 ” Ambohipotsy District.
Rarija 1876 ” ” ”
Rafaralahingita® 1878 ” Tsiafahy District.
Ralaiseheno 1878 » ” »
Ravelona 1879 ” ” ”
Ramananjanahary 1878 ” Ankadibevava District.
Rakotovao ” ”» ” »
Rabenahy 187 ” ” ”
Rabadaoro* , 187 » Ambatomanga District.
Rainijaivelo ” ” ” ”
Rakotovao* ” ” Ambohitantely District.
m arinana ) ,:;,-

Rakotovao* 1878 ” } nN mbohit a ntely District.
Andrianaivo 1873 ” Ampamarinana District.
Rakotovao 1875 ” ”

* Supported by the Palace Church.

N

TEN YEARS’ REVIEW.

319

NATIVE PASTORS AND EDUCATED EVANGELISTS.

Name. Teeine | Position. Church or District.
College.

Rainitandra 1874 | Evangelist. | Ambohibeloma District.
Andrianary 1878 ” ” ”
Rainijoelina 1877 ” ” ”
Rabarijaona 187 ” ” 8
Rainimanana 1873 ” Andohalo District.
Radavidra 187 ” ” ”
Rajaona* 187 ” nn 2),
Ratrema* 1876 ” Isoavina District.
Andriamanantsiety 1873 ” ” ”
Rainizatovo 1878 ” ” ”
Ramanitra 1878 ” mo mo
Rasoamaharo 1875 ” Faravohitra District.
Rainimisa 1879 ” ” yo
Radavidra* 1878 ” Ambohimanga District.
Andrianavalona 1877 ” ” ”
Raobelina ” ” ” ”
Rainimarosaona 1879 » mm ”
Andriamanisa 1876 ” Vonizongo.
Rainibanona 1878 ” ”
Andriankoto ” ” ”
Rarinosy 1875 ” ae
Rakoto 1878 | ~ ,, ”
Radaniela 1877 | Teacher College.
Andriambalo 1878 » wD
Rainijaofera 1876 | Evangelist Antsihanaka.
Andrianarana » ” ”
Rakotomanga 1878 ” ”

. Rajaofera 1878 ” ”
Rahaingo 1879 ”
Andriamiraho 1875 ” Tamatave.
Rarivo 187 ” Betsileo.
Rabenjamina 1878 ”
Rainidamary 1877 ” ”
Rainimalanjaona 1879 ” ”
Andrianarosy 1877 ” ”
Ranjoanina 1879 ” ”
Andrianatorot 1877 » South-east coast.
Raobelinat 1878 ” ” ”
Rainiamboazafyt — » ”
Raobelinat 1878 ° » Ankavandra.
Andrianaivoramirahot | 1878 ” Notth-east coast.
Rainijaona 1879 » Mahanoro.
Ravokatra 1878 » Vatomandry.

* Supported by the Palace Church.
+ Supported by the Native Missionary Society.

—_ OS
2254

“
BV 3625 .M2 L67 1880
Ten yon review of miAJP7671
ver Institution Libra

WALL lt

