This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized
by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the
information in books and make it universally accessible.

Google books

https://books.google.com

Sohal Lb pcpseeeeaneneapenceeerhgieest ete

TY
Psa
yur 2 /

fs £7779 Va a if
~WIYVIMO | nopurs anonourey > py bamon nual) ren! THY hivb, Vp tif Id,
it

4eG A. bb,

A NARRATIVE

OF THE

PERSECUTION OF THE CHRISTIANS

IN

MADAGASCAR;

WITH DETAILS OF THE

ESCAPE OF THE SIX CHRISTIAN REFUGEES NOW IN
bd ENGLAND.

i

BY J. J. FREEMAN AND D. JOHNS,

FORMERLY MISSIONARIES IN THE ISLAND. ~

THE PROFITS OF THE WORK DEVOTED TO THE RELIEF OF THE ‘
PERSECUTED NATIVES OF MADAGASCAR. : OF

Third Thousand.

Martyrdom of Rasalama.—See @bap, VII.
LONDON :—JOHN SNOW, 35, PATERNOSTER ROW.

1840.
EXPLANATION OF THE FRONTISPIECE.

Tue six Refugees now in England are represented as waiting
on the beach at Tamatave, where they embarked, and looking
out while the vessel is beating up for the port. A principal aim
has been to give good likenesses of the whole party, and it is
thought the artist has succeeded well, in copying the painting
which was executed for the purpose, with equal kindness and
fidelity, by a lady whose heart has been long in the missionary
field. To those acquainted with the features of the Malagasy
refugees it is scarcely needful to say that, Rafaravavy sits calmly
on the left, while Sarah is standing, dressed in blue, and meekly
amiling at her side. David is pointing with his finger towards
the vessel in sight, and James is eagerly listening to his remarks.
Simeon, in mood grave and sedate, stands by the side of James,
and Joseph sits on the ground on the right, taking his full share
in the conversation.

That they are supposed to have ventured out on the beach
quite so boldly, and to have been dressed in colours quite so gay,
at such a time, must be put to the artist’s account. But the
scenery is correct—the dresses faithfully show the native cos-
tume and mode of wearing it—and the waiting at Tamatave to
embark is now a fact in history.

The Vignette, in mournful contrast with the soft and inviting
scenery of the Frontispiece, exhibits the harsh and revolting
circumstances and manner of the martyrdom of Rasalama. She
is kneeling, and just about to receive the first spear—others are
being raised ready to repeat the blow; a young man stands on
the right in the fore-ground, with his left hand placed on his
mouth, while mournfully gazing on the cruel scene, and is in-
tended to represent Rafaralahy, the second martyr of Madagascar.
The dogs are waiting to devour their victim.

wu

NY
PREFACE.

Few events in the history of modern missions have
created so intense an interest in the hearts of British
Christians of all denominations, as the persecution to
which the little flock of native converts in Madagascar
has been subjected during the last five years. That in-
terest must be contemplated as so much gain, on the
broad scale, to the cause of Christian missions. It has
awakened prayer and sympathy. It has confirmed many
holy feelings and called forth many benevolent efforts.
The “ things which have happened ” in Madagascar, and
which for the moment obstruct the “ free course’ of the
word of the Lord, must ultimately be overruled for the
furtherance of the Gospel. ‘“ No weapon that is formed
against Zion can prosper.”

The following narrative has been drawn up in com-
pliance with the suggestions of many valued friends, who
have wished to be in possession of a succinct and au-
thentic account of the circumstances connected with the
Christian church in Madagascar, and especially with the
escape of the six refugees who have been now nearly a
year in England.

The History of Madagascar by the. Rev. W. Ellis,
lately published* under the sanction of the London Mis-
* By Jackson and Co., Newgate Street.

a2
iv PREFACE.

sionary Society, contains a narrative of the principal
events which relate to the suppression of Christianity in
that country in February, 1835, and of various subsequent
events during the succeeding two years. The present
volume might, therefore, seem almost superfluous; or at
any rate a brief appendix to that work might be thought
to supersede the necessity of this. There are, however,
many persons in the religious community, to whom the
larger work is not easily accessible; yet, having their
best sympathies identified with the cause of missions,
may be gratified, and, it is hoped, profited by the perusal
of a small and cheap volume, such as is now prepared
for their use.

Mr. Ellis’s work is the only existing complete view of
the history and state of Madagascar. The narrative con-
tained in this volume relates almost exclusively to the
persecution. Readers who may wish for a more ample
elucidation of the character of the country and its inha-
bitants and manners are referred to the copious details
in Mr. Ellis’s two volumes.

In placing the history of the persecution contained in
this volume in the hands of the Christian public, it is
the earnest wish of the writers to create only such feelings
as primitive Christians would have wished to create by a
recital of the sufferings of their persecuted and afflicted
brethren. They would neither indulge an acrimonious
spirit, nor employ “ wrathful” terms in describing the
conduct of the unhappy and unrelenting persecutors.

The religion of the Saviour inculcates on all, the spirit
of meekness and love, the heartfelt forgiveness of in-
juries, with prayer for them that persecute and revile the
PREFACE. v

disciples of the Son of God, himself the bright example
of all the charities which his religion teaches. .

The history of the “ faith and patience” of any portion
of the suffering church, enduring, as in days of old, a
“* great fight of affliction,” may not be without utility to
those who, under circumstances far less appalling, are
striving for the faith of the gospel. They will find in the
meekness and constancy of modern martyrs new illus-
trations of the life and power of the gospel. They will
see that its principles, embraced by faith and operating
by love, produce the same holy results as in apostolic
times, and that they have lost none of their vital energy
by the lapse of centuries. Truth is immortal; and iis
Divine Author attests its divinity, as revealed in the
Gospel, by the purity it creates, the elevation of character
it sustains, and the holy consolations it yields, even
amidst the terrors of martyrdom itself. The results of
modern missions furnish important links in the chain,
the unbroken chain of evidence, by which the truth of
Christianity is attested to the world from age to‘age.

It is hoped this narrative may deepen the interest
already cherished in the bosoms of British Christians
on behalf of Madagascar, and may excite them to more
importunate prayer in its favour, so that its wounds may
be healed and its captivity turned.

Names, dates and places have been specified with
considerable caution; occasionally they have been con-
cealed or stated ambiguously, in order to avoid the danger
of the narrative ever being made a clue in the hands of
the native government, where it may perchance fall, to
assist in the apprehension and condemnation of any
vi PREFACE.

parties in the island, yet exposed to the malice and fury
of their rulers; and hence, should some circumstances
mentioned seem to require further elucidation, the reader
will candidly excuse the seemingly incomplete or obscure
passage, by regarding it as one of those cases where it
might have been cruelly hazardous to have been more
explicit.

If any profits arise from the sale of this volume they
will be applied to the relief of Madagascar Christians,
who are still suffering there for Christ’s sake, and in
part to those who have effected their escape and found
an asylum either in Mauritius, or in England, a land
where liberty and charity love to dwell.

The first and second chapters of the narrative contain
a brief account of the island, of the state of the country,
of the late King Radama, and of the accession and
government of the Queen. The third chapter is devoted
to an exhibition of the native religion, and the fourth
to an outline of the operations of the mission established
there by the London Missionary Society. These chapters
have been introduced in order to render the whole nar-
rative the more complete, and especially for the sake of
such readers as may not be in possession of the more
ample sources of information already adverted to.

J. J.F.

D. J.
Walthamstow,

near London.
May 22, 1840.
‘CONTENTS.

CHAPTER I.
INTRODUCTORY.

Commercial value of Madagascar—Population, extent, pro-
ductions, trade—Origin of inhabitants—Independent
provinces—Semi-civilization—Capacities—The Capital—
Radama—British connexion with Radama—His illness
and death—Accession of the Queen—Her origin and
claims—Murder of Rakotobe, of Ratefy, and others—
Starving to death—Treachery—Ramanetaka’s escape—
Andriamihaja, his melancholy fate—Queen’s dreams
about him—His successors in office—Despotism . . «

CHAPTER II.

GENERAL STATE OF THE COUNTRY SINCE THE ACCESSION

RANAVALONA.

Proportion of the country under the Queen’s government—
Standing army—Bourgeois—Extermination of the male
population—Expeditions—Hova troops self-destroyed at
Ikongona—Crucifixion—Carnage—Near escape of two
boys—Sale of captive children—Native letter describing
a campaign—American whalers—Embassy to England—
Barbarous cruelty—Civil service to the government—
Practice of district betting—Villages deserted—Modes of
capital punishment—Queen’s amusements—Power abused
—Provisions scarce—Service ‘to the’ Gdvernment by the
women 5 6 «© ¢ © © © © © © © © «@ «©

CHAPTER III. -

Native religion of the Malagasy; ideas of God—Their
idolatry—Charms—Places at which they offer worship—
The soul—Death—Curious anecdote in the ‘“ Manao
afana”—Divination—W itchcraft—Ordeal of Tangena—
Votive offerings—Moral character . . 0 «0 «© «

Or

24

51
viii CONTENTS.

CHAPTER IV.
Outline of the Operations of the London Missionary Society
‘in Madagascar, from their commencement in 1818, to
their suspension in 1835. . 2. 2. « 2. 2. « « « 66

CHAPTER V.

Unfavourable circumstances affecting the progress and
prospects of the Mission, and indicating the spirit and
intentions of the native government, prior to the Edict
for the suppression of Christianity in February, 1835. . 87

CHAPTER VI.

Detailed account of the proceedings directly connected with
the suppression of Christianity in Madagascar . . . 116

CHAPTER VII.
Events occurring in the history of the Mission from the
Queen’s Edict, Ist March, 1835, to the Martyrdom of
Rasalama in 1837. 2. . 2 «© «© © «© «© « « « 150

CHAPTER VIII.

From the Martyrdom of Rasalama, 1837, to that of Rafa-
ralahy,in 1838 2 1. 1 6 6 ew we ew eh Ce «189

CHAPTER IX.
From the Martyrdom of Rafaralahy to the Escape of
the Christian Refugees from the Capital, on their way to
Tamatave . 2 6 6 6 © © © © © © © 6 © 215

CHAPTER X.

Journey of the Refugees from Tananarivo to the Coast,
where they embarked for Mauritius; including various
providential Escapes from Discovery and Apprehension
onthe Road « « © © © © © © © © «© « « 249

CHAPTER XI.

From the Embarkation of the Refugees at Tamatave to
their arrival in England—Reception there, and Resi-
dence to the present time—Condition of the Christians
remaining in Madagascar—Letter from the Refugees in
England to their suffering Brethren in Madagascar—
Conclusion . ee er er re 20°)
NARRATIVE,
&e.

CHAPTER I.

INTRODUCTORY,

Commercial value of Madagascar—Population, extent, pro-
ductions, trade—Origin of inhabitante—Independent pro-
vinces—Semi-civilization—Capacities—the Capital—Radama
—British connexion with Radama—His illness and death—
Accession of the Queen—Her origin and claims—Murder of
Rakotobe, of Ratefy, and others—Starving to death—
Treachery—Ramanetaka’s escape—Andriamihaja, his melan-
choly fate—Queen’s dreams about him—His successors in
office—Despotism.

Ir is one of the most singular circumstances connected
with the modern history of European enterprise, that
Madagascar has never been subdued, and colonized, by
any European state. The French have had the earliest
and largest connexions with that island, but have scarcely
ever exercised the sovereignty over any extensive portion
of its territory. Its value has been unaccountably over-
looked, and its insalubrity greatly overrated. It was
justly regarded by a French writer at the close of the last
century, as capable of indemnifying France for the loss of
St. Domingo; and, with equal propriety, it has been
represented by an English gentleman, intimately ac-
quainted with this subject, as having capabilities to render
B
2 VALUE OF MADAGASCAR.

it of more worth to Great Britain than all her possessions
in the West Indies.

The island is somewhat larger than Great Britain and
Treland, containing an industrious, intelligent, and semi-
civilized population, amounting, there is reason to believe,
to between four and five millions.

The extent of its natural resources has not yet been
adequately ascertained. ‘There are vast forests, rich sa-
vannahs, numerous lakes, and many valuable rivers. The
land is everywhere low in the neighbourhood of the coast,
and the interior is mountainous. The highest elevation in
the country probably does not exceed 8,000 feet. Iron, alate,
and lime-stone are abundant. Coal, it is said, exists; and
silver, it has also been affirmed, has been discovered near
the capital, but of which the natives are forbidden by the
government to speak, lest the fact of its existence becom-
ing known, should excite the usual cupidity of Europeans,
and terminate in the subjection of the country to a foreign
yoke :—not at all an improbable supposition, with the
history of Mexico and India in view. Many valuable
articles suited for commerce are already produced ; some
on a large seale, and all capable of an indefinite increase,
whenever intelligence, liberty, and capital, can obtain
fair play in the country. Among these articles may be
specified sugar, cotton, hemp, silk, indigo, tobacco, gum-
elastic, gum-copal, ebony, wax, &c. The only articles at
present largely exported are cattle and rice, to Mauritius
and Bourbon, besides hides, horns, prepared beef, ebony,
and gum-copal, and a manufactured cloth called Rofia,
from the beautiful palm tree of that name.

Madagascar possesses many remarkably fine ports,
INHABITANTS. - 3

harbours, and roadsteads. Most of these are on the
eastern coast, such as Diego Suarez, Vohimaro, Foul.
Point, Tamatave, Mananzary, Mahela, and Fort Dauphine
On the western side, the Bay of St. Augustine has been
long known to all European countries having intercourse
with India, and Bembatoka on the north-west. The
principal trade on the east side of the island is carried
on with Mauritius and Bourbon, and on the west, with
the. Arabs from Muscat, and the Americans. The Ma-
lagasy have no shipping whatever of their own. In marme
architecture they have not advanced a step beyond the rudest
and simplest canoe. They have nothing in boat building
to compete with the New Zealander or South Sea
Islander.

The inhabitants are all of a dark complexion, some
races being much more swarthy than others. They are
evidently of a varied origin, and to a large extent are now
so intermingled with one another, as to have lost the dis-
tinctive traces of their original condition. The language,
which is the same throughout the island, with a few dia-
lectical varieties, identifies the inhabitants with the Ma-
layan races. Some of the natives possess Malay. features,
others resemble’ Arabs, and a few approximate to the
negro race, but without the woolly hair.

Madagascar does not appear ever to have formed one
kingdom, or to have been held under the sovereignty of
one chieftain. During the whole period that it has been
intimately known to Europeans, which is about 200 years,
it has been occupied by independent tribes, holding pos-
session of their respective districta, and amounting to
about twenty or thirty, but among which, some few were

B 2
4 SEMI-CIVILIZATION.

always more powerful and extensive than the rest. There
is no one generic name by which tribes recognise one
another as inhabitants of the same country, nor have they
any common name for the whole island itself. They dis-
tinguish themselves by the respective territories to which
they belong, as Sakalavas, Betanimenas, Hovas, &c.
‘* Madagascar” is a name given to the country, as it ap-
pears, by foreigners, either Arabs or Europeans; and
“ Malagasy,” which is an adjective for the inhabitants
and language of the country, is but very partially used by
the people themselves, and principally on the eastern
coast.

The natives of Madagascar are not in a state of bar-
barism. They appear to have acquired, from time im-
memorial, by their intercourse with Arabs and Malays,
and subsequently with Europeans, many of the arts and
habits of civilized life. They possess large flocks of
cattle, cultivate and artificially irrigate extensive tracts of
soil, are familiar with the value of property, and live in
large communities, with considerable regularity of muni-
cipal government. They have no native coin. In those
parts of the island, where they have had little or no inter-
course with foreigners, purchases are made by exchange ;
in the rest, the Spanish dollar is used, and for amounts
smaller than the dollar, it is cut into pieces and payment
made by weight. The only native metal worked is iron ;
the people have long known the manufacture of various
articles in that metal, as well as in horn, wood, silk, and
cotton. They excel also in the manufacture of silver
chain from dollars imported in the sale of their pro-
duce. Many of their houses are large and substantially
PROTESTANT MISSION. 5

built of wood, and their towns, which usually occupy the
summits of hills, are well defended by large moats. The
people are industrious in their habits and peaceable in
their dispositions: they are hospitable to strangers, and
respectful and courteous in their demeanour to each
other. Under a government less oppressive and rapa-
cious, the country would soon assume an appearance of
great fertility and comfort, and by the fostering care of
liberal and enlightened rulers, the people would rapidly
rise in the scale of intelligence, wealth, and power. There
are materials to render the Malagasy a noble and power-
ful nation, whose friendship and resources would be well
worthy of commercial relations with Europe and India,
and whose mind and energy would qualify them to act as
benefactors on the eastern coast of Africa.

Madagascar has attracted more of the notice of Great
Britain during the last twenty-five years than in any
former period. This has arisen, in part, from the cir-
cumstance of the island of Mauritius having been finally
ceded (after conquest) to the Crown of Great Britain, and
from the commercial relations between that beautiful
island and Madagascar,—and in part, from the labours of
the Protestant Mission, established there in 1818 by the
London Missionary Society.

At the period just mentioned, Radama was a powerful
and enterprising, though youthful, chieftain in that part
of the island called the Hova country, situated in about the
most central part of Madagascar, 200 miles from the
eastern coast. He had succeeded to his father, Andrian-
impoinimerina, who, from a very limited possession of
influence and power, had risen to extensive authority, and
6 RADAMA.

had formed the ambitious project of subjugating the whole
country to his own individual control. Radama inherited
the ambition of his father, adopted his policy, and suc-
ceeded in enlarging the boundaries of his kingdom. In
all this he was much favoured by the friendship and
countenance of Sir Robert Farquhar, at that time go-
vernor of Mauritius. Sir Robert had the sagacity to
-discern the enterprising qualities of Radama, and formed
.@n alliance with him on behalf of the British Government.
“The terms of that alliance involved some points of ques-
tionable policy, for while Radama engaged to suppress
the slave traffic in Madagascar, the British government
engaged to supply him annually with an equivalent, con- |
sisting, besides money, of arms, military clothing, and
-ammunition, for the loss of revenue occasioned by the
suppression of the slave trade. Radama was sagacious
€nougb to see his own interest in the offer of the governor
‘of Mauritius, and found in the “ equivalent” of arms,
clothing, and ammunition, the means of equipping a large
native army, by which he might effectually destroy the
independence of the tribes around him, and so become,
de facto, what he always claimed to be, but never actually
was, king of Madagascar. And thus Great Britain,
having supplied a handful of men with the weapons of
destruction, and taught them how to wield them most
effectually by sending a few soldiers to drill the natives,
lent herself ungraciously to the task of abetting the ruin
of the independence, liberty, property, homes, and lives
of thousands and many tens of thousands of the peaceful
inhabitants of the island, who had never raised a finger
against the British throne, nor against the Hovas over
DEATH OF RADAMA. Sy |

-whom Radama reigned, but who now, furnished with
British weapons, could desolate whole regions of inoffen-
sive agriculturists, and glory in schemes of conquest,
rapine, and blood, that have literally filled the whole of
Madagascar with groans, and anguish, and death.

It was in the spring of 1827, that Radama left the
capital to visit the eastern coast of the island. He re-
mained several months at Tamatave, where courting
Europeans and colonial visitors, and courted by them in
return, he indulged habits of intemperance and irregu-
larity that would have wasted even stronger constitutions
than his own. On his return home, at the close of the
year, he was far from being well. An affection of the
throat had seized him, his constitution was undermined,
and he found a premature grave in July of 1828, at the
age of thirty-six. The reports which were circulated as
to his having been poisoned, were perfectly groundless.
No other poison than the habitual and copious use of
ardent spirits was needed to destroy the vigour of his
constitution. Vices usually attendant on intoxication were
superinduced ; diseases followed, and Radama ‘perished
by their natural effects.

Rakotobe, the eldest son of Radama’s eldest sister,
was the recognised heir apparent up to the time of Ra-
dama’s death. Had Radama lived long enough to have
ason grown up to maturity, his ambition would, in all
probability, have appointed him successor to the crown
in preference to a sister’s child, whatever other claims
the latter might, by usual custom, be supposed to sustain.
The only son Radama had, died while an infant, not
without strong suspicions of unfair means having been
8 ACCESSION OF THE QUEEN.

employed for his destruction, by interested parties and
near relations.

The death of Radama was concealed from the public
for a few days. Two favourite officers had been in con-
stant attendance on him, and these, it is believed, were
adopting secret measures to secure the succession of
Rakotobe, the legitimate claimant. They were probably
aware that they would have to encounter considerable
difficulty, from the state of parties, in effecting the object,
and therefore, acting with extreme caution and policy,
hesitated to adopt the prompt measures the case demanded. ~
One of these had, a few months previously, accused to *
the king some of Radama’s nearest relations of some
offences that incurred his severe displeasure, and he was
now alarmed for his own safety lest, on the death of his
sovereign, these parties should find means of resentment.
It was during this delay that the measures were formed
to secure the accession of Ranavalona, the present queen.
A young man who had been promoted a short time before
by Radama to the rank of the sixth honour, as a reward
for his courage on being willing to fight a duel at the
king’s desire, was in attendance on the two officers already
mentioned, and hence had the opportunity of becoming
acquainted with the fact of Radama’s decease. He
seized the moment to convey the information to Ranava-
lona, who had been one of the wives of Raduma.

The father of Ranavalona had saved the life of An-
drianimpoinimerina, the father of Radama, when his ©
uncle, Andrianjafy had formed the design of destroying
him, by pushing him over the brow of the hill at Am-
bohimanga. When Radama’s father came to the crown,
RANAVALONA. 9

he took Ranavalona as an adopted daughter, and betrothed
her to his son Radama, arranging also, before he died,
that Radama should succeed him in the government, and
that he should be succeeded by the issue he might have

‘by Ranavalona, in preference to that by any other wife.
Radama had no family by her, and certainly entertained
not the remotest idea that she was to succeed him. The
party, however, which formed itself in her favour at his
death, affirmed that it was the will of Andrianim-
poinimerina that, on the decease of Radama, Ranavalona
should inherit the kingdom; and on the basis of this
unwarranted, improbable, and false assertion, the mea-
sure was carried, and the present queen was placed upon
the throne.

Radama always treated her as his espoused wife, in
virtue of his father’s arrangement, and she was recognised
as holding the high rank of one ofthe “‘ roambinifolovavy,”
—twelve wives of the sovereign; but she was not the wife
of his choice, nor the mother of his children. Some of
her relations had been destroyed on the accession of Ra-
dama, and this may have’ occasioned no small portion of
that deadly resentment which, on her accession, proved
so fatal to various members of Radama’s family. -

Immffiately Ranavalona was informed of the death of
the king, she sent for two military officers of the rank of
colonels, who came originally from her ‘own native
village, acquainted them with the death of Radama, and
promised, if they would devote themselves to her interest,
so that she could obtain the throne, to advance them to
the highest rank in the army, to reward them with wealth,
and to secure to them the privilege of “‘ Tsy maty manota,”’

3 8
10 RANAVALONA.

i.e. exemption from capital punishment for any offence
they might hereafter commit. Heartily entering into this
arrangement, they took Ranavalona and one of her at-
tached female friends, another of the twelve wives of the
sovereign, and concealed them in a private residence. They .
then proceeded to the judges and the keepers of the idols ;
and having succeeded in attaching them to their interest,
collected without delay the soldiers under their command.
All this was effected so promptly and so secretly, that
even Rafozehana, the principal officer of the army and
resident at the capital, was not aware of the movements
till it was too late to arrest them. Being called in to
assist in making arrangements to proclaim the queen, he
solicited a day’s delay, that he might collect the division
of troops under his more immediate direction. This was
prevented ; he was summoned within the courtyard, and
was forced at once to declare on whose side he was, nor
was he permitted to leave the place till the whole business
was completed. His aim was unquestionably to secure
the crown to Rakotobe, the legitimate successor, but on
finding it impossible to secure the object, he saved him-
self by becoming a zealous and eloquent partisan of the
queen.

Ranavalona’s party was now in the possession of the
courtyard. Several of the officers, judges, and idol-
keepers were there, and two important divisions of the
army (Avaradrano and Voromahery) on their side. To
all these it was then announced, that the idols had named
Ranavalona as successor to Radama, and their consent
was demanded. Four officers of the Tsindranolahy re-
plied, that they could not, whatever might be the conse-
DEATH OF RAKOTOBE. 11

quence, conceal the fact that the late king had named
Rakotobe and Raketaka (Radama’s own daughter,) as
the party to succeed him. They had scarcely given this
proof of their fidelity to their late sovereign, than twenty
or thirty spears were plunged into them by the by standers,
and they perished on the spot. This decided the whole
question. Whatever might be the wishes or designs of
others, they now regarded their case as lost, and were
silent. The cannons were fired, and the queen was
proclaimed.

Soon after these transactions a message, both verbal
and written, was transmitted to the missionary families
and all the Europeans resident at the capital, Tananarivo,
announcing the accession of the queen, promising pro-
tection to their persons and property, and encouragement
in their labours.

Rakotobe, the young prince already mentioned, and
who was the first scholar placed under the care of the
Society’s mission in 1820, was apprehended and conveyell
to a village not far from the capital, from whence, after
being detained a few days, he was removed to another
about twenty miles distant. He was conscious of his fate,
and pleaded for his life, but in vain. His guards were his
executioners; they yielded to his request of allowing him
time to pray before he was put to death; his grave was
then dug and he was speared by the soldiers and buried
on the spot. He died, not without having, for some time
previously, given encouraging evidence that he had sin-
cerely embraced the religion of the Saviour, and placed
his hopes on Him who had suffered, the just for the un-
just, to bring sinners unto God. His only sister survives,

12 RATEFY.

and resides at the capital, and was the wife of one of the
members of the embassy that visited England from the
court of Madagascar in 1837.

At this time Ratefy, father of Rakotobe, was command-
ing officer at Tamatave. This prince, of mild and ami-
able deportment, visited England in 1821, and attended
the annual meeting of the London Missionary Society that
year.

Deeply anxious as to the probable course of events, on
hearing of the death of his brother-in-law, the king, and
naturally solicitous as to the safety and welfare of his only
son, he imprudently quitted his post, made arrangements
for the management of business, and with his wife pro-
ceeded on their journey towards the capital. They had
not gone far when they were met by some troops, who
were on their way to him with a message from the queen.
They were ordered to return to the coast, and accordingly
went back to Tamatave. From George Bennet, Esq. and

«he Rev. D. Griffiths, then on their way from the capital
to the same place, they obtained additional intelligence as
to the state of affairs in general, and learnt for the first
time the afflictive information of the death of their beloved
child. Filled with the keenest anguish, and alarmed for
their own safety, they attempted to effect their escape to
Mauritius, but the only captain at that time in the harbour
refused to allow them a passage in his vessel. The de-
tention proved fatal. The governor of Mauritius, as soon
as he heard the circumstances, dispatched a ship to the
port to afford the means of escape; but in the megntime
Ratefy had been summoned to the capital to take his trial, on
the charge of having abandoned his station, and proceeded

HI8 DEATH. ; 13

towards the capital without permission from the sovereign.
The offence was declared in a public assembly of the
people, called together on the occasion. He himself was
detained a prisoner at Ambatomanga, and having been
declared guilty was immediately speared to death. The
trial was held merely to save appearances. The resolution
had been previously taken to put him to death, and, as if
aware of his fate, he told the executioners on their entering
the house where he had been kept a few days as prisoner,
that since Radama was dead, it was impossible he could
be regarded otherwise than as a guilty person. His con-
nexion with Radama, and his just expectations as to the
succession of his son to the throne, were sufficient circum-
stances to seal his doom on the death of the king. The
queen could not have commenced her career by any two
more unrighteous acts, than the murder of Rakotobe and
that of his father Ratefy. Radama’s eldest sister, the
wife of Ratefy, was detained some months on the coast,
where she was again expecting shortly to become a mo-
ther. Before this event could occur, she -was starved to
death at Ambohibohazo, by order of the queen. Her
mother shared a fate equally cruel soon after the king’s
death. She was sent to reside in a part of the country
where fever prevails; a mere pittance only of food was
allowed her occasionally, as if to prolong her sufferings,
but not sufficient to sustain nature, and the soldiers who
guarded her were instructed to terrify her, from time to
time, by pretending that her executioners were just at
hand, and asking her where she preferred being killed,
whether in the house or outside of it ; and thus, by cruel
alarms, fever, neglect, and insufficient provisions, she was
14 STARVING TO DEATH.

destroyed. Her remains were interred in the family grave
at Antanjondroa, in the district of Marovatana. Her
brother, Andrianilana, who lived in Imamo, was put to
death at the same time. Her only surviving son, Rata-
fikia, own brother to Radama, who was living at Manan-
jary, on the eastern coast, was also destroyed by the
inhuman method?of starvation. One of his guards, since
dead, has related, that for a period of four or five days his
cries were most distressing, but that he survived upwards
of eight days. Some hours after he had ceased to groan,
the captain of the guard opened a window to ascertain if
he was dead, when the wretched and exhausted sufferer,
unable to speak, pathetically expressed his wants by an
earnest motion of his hands towards his lips. His guard
was touched with pity but durst not afford relief. He was
buried in the same grave with his mother and sister—all
three being cut off by the queen by the inhuman plan of
starvation.

Possibly one reason that may be assignéd for the adop-
tion of this mode of putting to death, may be found in the
custom which generally prevails in the island, of not
shedding royal blood. The letter of the custom is thus
preserved, at a far more cruel sacrifice than could attend
its violation. English history, however, is not without its
sad parallel. The natives of Madagascar are not more cruel
than some of our own ancestors, nor their princes more
despotic than some who have occupied a British throne.
Twenty-two noblemen were starved to death at Corfe
Castle ; ‘‘ a mode of destruction,” says Sir James Mackin-
tosh, “which, combining the utmost agony with the least
intimidation, is worthy of a being of unmingled malig-
RAMANANOLONA, 15

nity.” Richard the Second, who died by the same means,
lingered fifteen days in Pomfret Castle.

At the time of his death, Radama had a cousin, Rama-
nanolona, whom he had made governor at Fort Dauphin ;
and another, Ramanetaka, governor at Majanga, on the
western coast of the island. The youngest, Ramananolona,
was put to death by emissaries sent from the queen soon
after her accession. As soon as they reached the place,
they acquainted the officer second in command, Ramana-
sina, with their business; and though he professed espe-
cial friendship for Ramananolona and had obtained his
promotion through him, loyalty to the queen, and especially
the hope of a share of the confiscated property of his
victim, induced him to undertake the task of accomplish-
ing the queen’s instructions. An opportunity was watched ;
the slaves and soldiers of Ramananolona were devotedly
attached to him, and might perhaps have resolved to de-
fend him in the irritation of seeing him suddenly attacked.
A scheme was therefore laid. His faithful attendants were
to be sent to the forest to fetch timber to build him a
house; during their absence his treacherous friend entered
his chamber early one morning, having a dagger con-
cealed under his lamba, and pretending to have some im-
portant communication to make to him, he approached
him, sat down near him, and then stabbed him to death.
His property, including a large number of slaves, of whom
he had from 500 to 600, was put on board an English
vessel and taken to Tamatave, from whence being con-
veyed to the capital, all were sold and distributed as the
queen directed. Two native officers had signed a de-
claration that the slaves put on board the English vessel
16 RAMANETAKA’S ESCAPE.

at Fort Dauphin were not slaves, otherwise the act would,
of course, have been illegal, and severe penalties must
have been inflicted. An explanation of the affair was
required at Mauritius, and the declaration saved the
parties concerned; but assuredly the slaves never re-
garded themselves in any other light than that of s/aves—
as such they were sold, and as such they were bought by
the people, just as other slaves are.

The eldest brother, Ramanetaka, appears to have acted
with much greater caution on receiving intelligence of the
death of the king. A party of 200 soldiers was ordered
to proceed about half way to the coast, and then meeting
him on his way up to the capital to murder him. A few
soldiers were sent forward to his station to acquaint him
with the death of the king, and to summon him to
Tananarivo to take the customary oath of allegiance to
the new sovereign. Shortly afterwards, unwilling to

trust himself where he knew nothing but treachery awaited
him, hé made arrangements to effect his escape. On
hearing the message calling him to the capital, he pre-
tended prompt compliance, induced the officers who were
to execute the warrant for his murder, to consent to the
embarkation of his property and family in a small Arab
sloop, that he and they might proceed some distance along
the coast to Ampananina, a given spot where they should
again land, and so facilitate the journey to the capital
within the twelve days allowed them by instructions from
the government. Having arranged the business during
the night, they embarked next morning in the Arab
sloop, in which the soldiers had seen him ship his
property, delighted to think they had now so securely
FATAL ELEVATION. 17

got their victim and all his wealth. By a little stratagem,
he induced the soldiers who were watching him and
hurrying him on to destruction, to consent to be placed
in a canoe, just to avoid sea sickness in the large sloop,
"and to be safely towed along as if in smooth water ;—the
rope was suddenly cut, the Arabs made sail, Ramanetaka
exclaimed, ‘ Life is sweet, I am off.’ The vessel was
soon out of sight in the Mosambique Channel, and the
officers made their way with difficulty to land, and with
no little chagrin to the capital. Ramanetaka has esta-
blished himself at Mohilla, one of the Comoro islands,
not forgetting his just claims to the crown of Madagascar,
nor ceasing to watch his opportunity for enforcing them.

The principal man in all the events that conducted
Ranavalona to the throne, was a young officer named
Andriamihaja. He was immediately chosen on her ac-
cession as her confidential adviser and prime. minister,
and raised to the highest rank in the army, in the stead
of an English officer, Mr. Brady, who had held the rank
of commander-in-chief during the latter years of the
reign of Radama. His elevation soon created jealousies
among his brother officers, especially among those in
personal attendance on the queen. Two of the most
formidable rivals and enemies he had to encounter were
two brothers, who have since succeeded him im office,
and who had been placed with the qeeen by order of the
principal idol. Andriamihaja was regarded by the keepers
of the idols also with much jealousy, partly because his
political influence interfered with theirs, and partly be-
cause, as the zealous friend of instruction and civilization,
he was evidently undermining their system of juggling,
18 JEALOUSY AND INTRIGUE.

deceit, and superstition. As the two brothers just men-
tioned, were in constant attendance on ‘the queen, they
found opportunity to supplant him in her affections and
passions; in vain did he, by virtue of his office, endea-
vour to remove them from the courtyard ; their party
increased, and they at length succeeded, through the
assistance of the diviners, to forbid him the court. After
the lapse of some months he became attached to a young
woman, who, though never admitted to the rank of a wife
of Radama, had been as nearly related to that honour as
circumstances admitted. The queen desired him to dis-
solve the connexion ; mortified, however, in being kept
out of the courtyard, and confiding too implicitly in her
promise, “‘ that he should not be put to death whatever
offence he might commit,” he determined to marry this
young woman. His enemies availed themselves of the
circumstance, denounced him as a traitor claiming pri-
vileges and rights such as no subjects could possess,
adding that he would frequently call himself ‘“Buonaparte,””
and that he certainly intended to seize the kingdom. He,
in company with all the officers in attendance on the
queen, had been put to the ordeal of tangena some months
previously, in accordance with the general custom of
“* purifying” those in attendance on the sovereign from
any possibility of witchcraft. He was now charged with
high treason and sorcery, and on these charges was
ordered to undergo the ordeal again ; he replied, that he
had taken it once by the order of the queen, and was
proved innocent; that his being required to take it a
second time could not originate, he felt sure, with the
queen ; that there must be some persons accusing him,
ANDRIAMIHAJA. 19

and therefore, according to the custom of the country, he
demanded to know who were his “ accusers.” The
officers who conveyed to him the message of the queen
were not allowed to enter the courtyard. They delivered
his reply to other officers who remained there, among
whom were the two brothers, his inveterate enemies.
The message that they conveyed was simply that he
refused to take the ordeal. It is said, that they had al-
ready, by a copious draught of ardent spirits, prepared
the queen to pronounce the sentence of death on her
former favourite, and they at once obtained her sanction
to the deed. The party returned to the officers who were
waiting at the gate, and immediately they heard the fatal
order, four of their inferior officers, called aides-de-camp,
rushed along, seized a knife from the shambles in the
public market on their way, and “ with feet swift to
shed blood,” entered the house, and the horrible tragedy
was soon completed. The murder was effected in his
own residence, while, with cool self-possession, Andria-
mihaja directed his murderers, with his own finger, to
the exact spot where to apply the steel which they were
plunging into his throat. Permission was granted to
inter the corpse, an unusual favour in the case of cri-
minals. He was buried in the family grave at Na-
mehana. The queen gave three silk robes to wrap the
body in. His ashes were not long allowed to rest in
peace ; his memory haunted the queen, she was scared by
the visions of the night, and orders were given that the body
should be exhumed. It was then laid in a shallow grave,
the head being cut off and placed at the feet, and the
head of a black dog being put in its stead at the neck of
20 SUPERSTITION,

the mangled corpse ;—a superstitious custom observed
whenever the sovereign happens to dream of a criminal
after execution. Still the fearful dreams continued, and
the bones were then taken up, burnt, and the ashes
scattered to the winds; but even yet the midnight visions
returned, and then the house of the unfortunate officer
was pulled down and burnt, and, with the earth on which
it stood, thrown over the rock at Ampahamarinana, and
the foundation sprinkled with holy water to guard it
against all future malevolent influences. About the same
time his junior wife, (for he had had two wives,) his
sister and one of his servants, were subjected to the ordeal
to ascertain if they had taken any criminal part with
him, in his supposed designs on the kingdom, and being
convicted, they were first strangled, and then burnt to
ashes. Thus the spell is said to have been dissolved,
and the dreams vanished ; but the stain of acruel murder
remains, aud, “ Ife who maketh inquisition for blood,”
will not permit the guilty to go unpunished.

There are two or three other circumstances connected
with the affecting case of this young man not unworthy
of notice. ‘When, on the death of Radama, it was con-
templated by the native government to dismiss all Eu-
ropeans from the country, of course including the mis-
sionaries, Andriamihaja defended their continuance as
identified with the progress of education and civilization—
objects which he strenuously recommended and aimed to
promote ; and in consequence of his efforts, arrangements
were entered into for the manufacture of various articles
by the missionary artizans. By his influence also
honours were conferred on the senior teachers and super-

1
SINGULAR CUSTOM. 21

intendents of the mission schools as a public approval of
their services, and an encouragement to education. He
obtained a copy of the New Testament and frequently
read it. He would have attended public worship at the
missionary chapel, but was dissuaded from it by his
friends, as a step likely to give great offence to the queen.
He, however, arranged that some of the officers under him
should attend in turn, and urged them to cultivate im-
provement in religious knowledge. On his being for- .
bidden to enter the courtyard, he regarded it as the pre-
lude to his fate, and remarked to a pious officer, that he was
persuaded he should not be suffered to live long, and
repeatedly asked what he must do in order to be happy
after death? He had also applied to a diviner, and in-
quired what would be his fate. The mpisikidy, or diviner,
told him he would die a violent death, blood would be
shed. He asked how he might avert the doom. The
diviner gave him little reason to expect that anything
could avert it, but directed him to mount a bullock, car-
rying on his head a vessel full of blood, and as the
animal moved along he was to spill the blood on his head,
and then send it away into the wilderness.*

This was done, but the doom was not averted. His
death took place on a Sunday afternoon. He had in the
morning received an order not to leave his house that
day, as a “ kabary,” or message, was to be sent to him
from the queen. In the afternoon he was alone, reclining
on a mat, reading the New Testament, waiting the mes-
sage of the sovereign. A pious officer entering the house,

* Might not this singular direction have had its origin in some
obscure tradition’ or fragment of the Jewish law of the scape-
goat. See Leviticus, ch. xvi.
22 PRESENT ADVISERS.

he told him he expected he should be put to death, and
again asked various questions respecting the way of
salvation. While they were conversing on the subject,
the parties entered the house, and the tragical scene
occurred which has been already described. While
Radama lived, the queen had not been a mother; about
a year afterwards her only child was born, and though, to
disguise facts, he was called “‘the son of Radama,”’ little
doubt was entertained, though few dared to express their
belief, that one reason of Andriamihaja’s melancholy fate
was to remove out of the way one who was generally
regarded as too nearly related to the future heir to the
throne. Inhuman policy might, perhaps, plead for such
a measure; but it stamps with the basest heartlessness,
the crime of a foul murder.

Andriamihaja was succeeded in office, and in the queen’s
regards, bytwo brothers—Rainiharo and Rainimaharo, and
these have retained ever since the exercise of the prin-
cipal authority and influence in her government; the
first as commander-in-chief of the army, and the second
as head officer of the queen’s household. A third
brother was made one of the principal judges, but has
since died. To the despotic and cruel measures advised
by these two favourites, the people attribute nearly all
their present calamities, and to the same source may be
attributed all "the measures adopted for the suppression
of Christianity and the restoration of the system of idolatry
and superstition, that was gradually declining and be-
coming extinct, while knowledge and religion were'per-
mitted to spread, during the latter years of Radama, and
the earlier part of the reign of Ranavalona.

After the recital of these facts, it seems superfluous to
BETTER DAYS. 23

add that the government of Madagascar is despotic.
Not only is the divine right of the sovereign maintained,
but the sovereign is thought actually to become divine. Ac-
cession to the throne is a kind of apotheosis. Honours are
paid as toadivinity. “Our visible God,” is the common
appellation with which the sovereign is greeted in public
by a servile multitude,

Occasionally, however, there is the semblance of an
appeal to the public will, possibly a remnant of the
customs of earlier times, when chieftains were more
dependent on the voluntary adherence of their retainers,
and a prelude of better days, yet to come, when the people
shall be treated as rational beings, and when the welfare
of subjects shall be regarded, at any rate, as one of the
legitimate ends of government.

This appearance of an appeal to the public consists in
calling together the whole of the inhabitants of a district,
on any important business that may occur, when both
the assembly itself and the sovereign’s message to the
assembly are called a kabary. The sanction of the
assembly to any great measure has been usually
demanded, and given after the measure has been ex-
plained and recommended by their respective leaders,
or principal men. At present the will of the sovereign
is announced, a standing army at her command is there
to enforce it, the people shout, “ Long live the Queen,”
and discuasion is superseded ; resistance would be death,
for liberty has perished already.
24 STATE OF THE COUNTRY.

CHAPTER II.

GENERAL STATE OF THE COUNTRY SINCE THE ACCESSION
OF RANAVALONA.

Proportion of the country under the Queen’s government—Stand-
ing army—Bourgeois—Extermination of the male popula-
tion—Expeditions—Hova troops self-destroyed at Ikongona—
Crucifixion—Carnage—Near escape of two boya—Sale of
captive children—Native letter describing a campaign—Ame-
rican whalers—Embassy to England—Barbarous cruelty—
Civil service to the government—Practice of district betting—
Villages deserted—Modes of capital punishment—Queen’s
amusements—Power abused—Provisions scarce—Service to
the Government by the women.

Ir is difficult to say what proportion of Madagascar is
actually under the government of Ranavalona. Radama’s
father, it is well known, commenced his career on a
very limited scale, and at the time of his death, his
dominions probably did not comprise above a sixth part
of the island. Radama, as already intimated, enlarged
his kingdom by conquest, till he obtained, it may be,
more than half of the island. To secure these additions,
and ultimately obtain the whole, have been the principal
objects of the queen’s reign hitherto. No claim to this
universal sovereignty over the island, can be established
on the ground of any former rights. The people claim-
ing it on the behalf of the queen are called Hovas,—
the race or tribe of natives inhabiting the province of
Ankova. . They assume to themselves the right of being
MILITARY EXPEDITIONS. 25

the masters of the island, and are attempting to establish
their claim by all the means they can command. Hence
the attention of the Hovas has been chiefly directed to
annual predatory excursions, or us they themselves loftily
designate them, “ military expeditions ;” and while these
have devastated and depopulated many distant parts of
the island, they have impoverished the province itself in
which the capital is situated, and out of which the troops
have been drawn for this destructive system. The pro-
vince of Ankova has been drained of its youth to main-
tain, during the past ten years, a standing army, amount-
ing to no less than from 20,000 to 30,000 men; and as
large numbers of these have been, from various causes,
annually cut off, new levies have been made, till the flower
of the people has perished.

These warlike excursions, for the purpose of subduing
the provinces that have not submitted to the Hovas, are
attended with melancholy results and cruelties abhorrent
to humanity. A division of the army, amounting to
perhaps 2,500 or even 10,000 men, as the case may
seem to require, is despatched about the close of the
rainy season to some fated spot, with orders to return
home by the commencement of the next rainy season,
affording a campaign of about six months. Usually the
army is attended by an equally large or larger number
of bourgeois, that is to say, non-military persons, fol-
lowing the camp to assist in obtaining plunder, which
they afterwards, at the close of the campaign, share in
fixed proportions with the regular troops.

These expeditions are extremely fatal to all parties
concerned. No commissariat existing in the Malagasy

c
26 EXTERMINATION

army, and no regular provision being made for the
troops, many of the soldiers perish on the road from
fatigue, famine, and disease. Many also are cut off by
the inhabitants of the districts they are attempting to
subjugate. Where they are successful, they depopulate
and destroy. Whole districts are stripped of their in-
habitants, and large tracts of country thrown utterly out
of cultivation. The policy of the queen during the last
seven years has been to exterminate all the male inha-
bitants of the conquered provinces capable of bearing
arms, and to reduce all the rest to slavery. It may be
estimated that no less than the fearful amount of
100,000 men have been murdered by the queen’s troops
since her accession. A few only of this number have
been killed while actually fighting ; the rest has consisted
of those who had laid down their arms, promised sub-
mission, and committed themselves into the power of
their deceitful but remorseless enemies. More than
double that number, including women and children, has
been captured and shared among the troops, or sold into
domestic slavery through various parts of the island.

Painful as may be the recital of some of the details of
this frightful subject, a complete view of the case cannot
be formed without it.

Among some of the earliest expeditions sent out during
the queen’s reign, were those under the command of
Rainiharo and Ramboasalama to the south, and of Ra-
valontsalama to the west, in 1831. Deceit and cruelty
were practised by both parties. The former, on their
way to their destination, came to a town in the Betsileo
country, and determined to sacrifice it for the sake of
‘OF MALE INHABITANTS. 27

plunder. There were about three hundred families
residing there, living in quiet and peaceable submission
to the Hovas, regarding them as friends, and never
dreaming of attempting to escape on the approach of the
army. The officers of the queen’s troops then invited all
the men from the village to a friendly repast with them
mm their tents, and the invitation was accepted. The
soldiers had private orders given them to be provided
with cords, and that, as soon as they heard the drum
beat, they should seize and tie up their guests. At
the appointed hour the unsuspecting villagers arrived,
entered the tents, sat’ down quietly waiting for the
cooked rice; the drum was heard, the soldiers seized
their visitors, led them to a spot at a little distance, and
then deliberately put them all to death by spearing.
The women and children of course were taken as plunder.
The second officer m command on this occasion, Ra-
mafadrahona, boasted that he had killed eleven of them
with his own hands.

One of the villagers who happened to remain at home,
hearing what was taking place, effected his escape to
Ikongona, about sixty or seventy miles distant, and re-
lated the dreadful tale. That village was situated on the
top of a high hill, and surrounded by a strong wall.
Here several chieftains were collected, and many thou-
sands of the people. As soon as they heard the fate of
_the man’s companions, they determined to accept no
such friendly invitation from the Hovas, but to defend
themselves to the utmost. The army arrived there in
three days. One division of it was appointed to the
attack, under the command of the officer above named,

c 2
28 BESIEGERS SELF-DESTROYED.

with instructions to retreat for the day at four o’clock,
if the village were not taken by that time. The path that
led up to it was exceedingly narrow, and was situated by
the side of a tremendous precipice. Close to the entrance
to the village was a spot of open level ground, and there
the soldiers, after having with difficulty arrived, planted
their cannon and fired on the village, while those within
defended themselves by casting stones over the walls, &c.
Many of the bourgeois had ventured between the soldiers
and the wall, to be ready, as soon as the village could be
taken, to rush in and seize the prey. Four o’clock
arrived, and the village was not taken; the commander
gave orders for the troops to withdraw; the bourgeois
hearing this, and being next to the wall, were afraid that
the soldiers would descend the path before them, and so
leave them in the rear exposed to the enemy, who might
take advantage of the retreat, rush out, and fall upon
them ; they therefore rushed impetuously forward in
order to get possession of the path first, and this threw
the whole line of soldiers into such irretrievable confusion,
that they actually pushed one another by hundreds,
officers, soldiers, bourgeois, pell-mell, over this tremen-
dous precipice, where they were dashed to pieces. Not
less than two or three thousand perished by this circum-
stance, and among them Ramafadrahona himself, and
his friend and companion Rafalimanana, as if Provi-
dence had taken vengeance on them for the innocent
blood they had shed. Not one of the villagers, however,
came out at the time; and when they did venture out,
they were astonished at the numbers that had perished,
and the quantity of muskets and spears scattered about,
CRUCIFIXION. 29

besides two or three pieces of cannon. The officer who
had the chief command was alarmed, and made no other
attempt to take the village till he obtained additional
forces. Within that period all the inhabitants abandoned
the village and sought refuge in the forests, and the army
of the Hovas returned home extremely mortified.

The other expedition went to the west, and, though
more successful as to booty, had been not less cruel and
unprincipled in their measures. The head man of the
district was accused of having about him some concealed
fire-arms. This was a mere pretence. An appeal,
however, was made to the ordeal of tangena, and of
course it convicted the parties whom it was wished and
intended to find guilty. All the principal men that
could be found were then seized and thrown, with their
hands bound, into a deep moat or ditch, dug by the
soldiers for the occasion; and, after being kept there
about two days without any kind of provisions, were
taken out, and actually crucified at short distances
from one another, forming a long line of excruciating
agony round the village. Many of their wives and
female relations refused to submit to their hard fate of
slavery, cruelty, and insult. ‘‘ This,” said they, “is the
land of our fathers, our husbands, and our brothers,
whom you have murdered in our sight, and shall we
now accompany you far away to Imerina to live and die
as slaves there?” The spear soon silenced their com-
plaints; they perished on the spot. Some thousands of
the people were, however, seized as booty, and conveyed
to Imerina by the soldiers.

A most revolting instance of barbarous cruelty occurrep
30 TREACHERY.

again next year in the capture of Ivato, by an expedition
under the command of the same officers who went to the
south in 1831, Rainiharo and Ramboasalama, taking
with them about 10,000 troops, and as many followers of
the camp. They found the people in their village on a
hill well prepared to defend themselves. The village
was almost inaccessible, and within it were ten or twelve
powerful chieftains and their people. The officers find-
ing it would be almost impossible to take the village by
force, employed stratagem, and endeavoured to persuade
the people to submit, promising, in the strongest terms,
that, if they would quietly deliver up their arms, no one
should injure them. This was done for three days suc-
cessively. At length a division of opinion arose among
the chieftains themselves ; some were disposed to place
- confidence in the Hovas, and others as strongly resisted a
measure so full of danger. One end of the village was
connected with a large forest, and the latter party made
their escayye there during the night. About 20,000 per-
‘sona, however, remained, and these, being again assured
of the most friendly dispositions towards them, delivered
up their muskets, spears, &c. They were surrounded by
soldiers, and all the men found able to carry a spear
were ordered to pass from one circle of soldiers to another,
while the women and children remained within the first
circle. They were carefully examined as they passed
along, to see whether they had yet concealed any weapons
about them. The soldiers then commenced tying their-
hands with cords. The poor deluded villagers now saw
their fatal mistake; death awaited them. Those that
were not yet bound made a desperate rush through the
CARNAGE. 31

soldiers, and some few of them got outside the circle,
but were soon killed by the soldiers. Two reached the
entrance of the forest, and would have effected their
escape, but for some of the Hovas, who were there col-
lecting fuel, and by whom they were seized and destroyed.
Those that were bound were killed at leisure the following
day. ‘The carnage commenced early in the morning and
lasted until late in the afternoon. The army then re-
turned flushed with their success to the capital, bringing
13,000 captives. Multitudes of these, filled with grief
and horror at the fate of their husbands and fathers, had
refused to eat on the road and suffered for it by being
beaten. Those who remained inflexible, shared the fate
of their friends, and were speared. Those who were un-
able to follow the army from weakness or illness were also
speared to death. It was unutterably distressing to wit-
ness, every now and then, an enfeebled and broken-hearted
mother endeavouring to carry her two or even three be-
loved children, knowing that if they could not keep up
with the army the spear would soon despatch them.
‘Grief, fatigue, and famine destroyed very many, long
before they reached the capital. Mothers perished with
their offspring prematurely born amidst the disasters and
horrors of this afflictive journey, while others after their
new born infants had been dashed to the ground, were
forced onward at the point of the spear, till nature,
stretched to the furthest point of endurance, could sustain
no additional pressure, and they sunk from utter ex-
haustion, and found in death a welcome release.
During the march to the capital, there were two little
captive boys, about eight or nine years of age, who slipped
32 SALE OF CAPTIVES.

out of the camp privately in the night, went to the river,
on the banks of which the army was encamped, and
remained there several hours, keeping their heads just
above water, and concealing them among the bullrushes.
The soldiers marched forward without observing them.
The picquets, who followed a mile or two behind to watch
for stragglers or deserters, found them, and drew them out
of the water. They were severely beaten, compelled to
keep up with the troops the remamder of the journey,
and then sold into hopeless servitude.

Inhuman beings only could witness without emotion
the condition of these wretched captives, by the time
they reach the capital. Often ten or fifteen mothers
were tied together with one cord, an infant at the back
of each, and a large bundle belonging to her captor on
her head, and some two or three of her children at her
side. At the place where the spoil was divided the most
distressing scenes were presented. One child would be
sold to one person, and another to another, and at length
the mother herself would be sold without the remotest
hope of ever again seeing her beloved offspring! Thou-
sands of mothers are yearly subjected to these indignities
and calamities.

Towards the close of this year, the people in the dis-
trict of Vohilena were wrought up to such a state of des-
peration by the acts of injustice done to them by some
of the Vadintany, (officers employed by the Judges in
civil cases,) who had seized some of their children, and
were about to sell them, that they killed the Vadintany on
the spot and rescued their children. Some troops were
immediately despatched from the capital to punish the
INCREASE OF BRIGANDS. 33

offenders. On the approach of the soldiers, many of the
people made their escape to the forest, others were per-
suaded to cast themselves on the clemency of the sovereign.
The greater part of them have remained in the forest to the
present time, obtaining only a precarious subsistence, and
forced into the condition of brigands; thus leaving it
almost impracticable to take a journey from Antsianaka
direct to the eastern coast, without falling into their
hands and being robbed.

In the following year, 1833, Ratsimanisa conducted an
expedition to the south, killed many of the people, and
returned home with 2000 captives. He administered
the ordeal of tangena to four chieftains, pretending to
ascertain whether they had any intention of rebelling
against the sovereign. Three out of the four were con-
victed, and of course put to death, with all the men in
their respective districts; the women and children were
taken captives. ,

Several other expeditions were sent to different parts
of the country this same year, and their proceedings were
of a similar character.

In the year 1834, the same troops were sent again to
the south, where they destroyed an immense number of
the people, and returned home with about 10,000 cap-
tives.

In 1835, a large expedition was despatched to the
neighbourhood of St. Augustine’s Bay, under the com-
mand of Rainiharo. Andrianisa and Ratiaray were
next incommand. There were about 10,000 or 11,000
troops in this expedition, accompanied by so large a num-
ber of bourgeois, as to make a total of not less, it is be-

c 3
34 8ST. AUGUSTINE’S BAY.

lieved, than 30,000, or 40,000 men. After advancing
beyond Fianarantsoa, a large part of the troopa and people,
being without provisions, were permitted to seize and
commit depredations on the property of the inhabitants,
and hence all the rice, manioc, cattle, &c., belonging to
parties who were the acknowledged ‘peaceable subjects
ofthe Hovas, were carried off by the army without remu-
neration, so that multitudes were actually left without
any means of support, for the rest of the year, and
perished with famine.

After proceeding by slow marches for nearly two
months, they reached the district which they intended to
plunder.

The following quotation from a letter sent by an officer,
to a friend residing at the capital, will give some account
of the proceedings of this expedition, and may be inter-
esting as a native production, and among their earliest
attempts at written narrative.

“With regard to our expedition, when we reached
Mahafaly, we began to make our arrangements for the
attack, and directed our steps towards Taboara, we did
not, however, reach it in time to seize the enemy; they
had fled on hearing of our approach, and there was not
a single person to be found there. When we had thus
failed to overtake them, we went south-west, across the
river Ionilahy ; we then made towards part of Iberoroha
and there encamped for a short time to explore the coun-
try all round. Two officers of the tenth rank of honour,
Rainimarolahy and Rakodia, went with 2000 soldiers to
the west ; and two others of the same rank, Andriamaro
and Rasoarivo, went with 2000 also to the east; Rama-
e
NATIVE LETTER. 35

zava with 1000 to the north, and Ramandranto with
1000 to the south. On the return of these parties we
proceeded to the north of Ionilahy, and there encamped,
constructing straw huts for our accommodation. Raza-
kandrianaina, Ratsitohaina and Ravelo of the eleventh
rank, were sent with 6000 troops to go southward to
Andriampierenana and Andriamahaka. The morning
after they had set out, Rainingory of the eleventh rank
was sent westward, proceeding by the stream of Ionilahy
till he should reach the coast, to examine the port in
Isalary. On arriving there, and beginning to examine
the villages of the enemy, there were found, to their asto-
nishment and dismay, no less than twenty-one ships, all
three-masted, in the port. The queen’s officers asked
them, ‘Are you white people here messengers of your
respective sovereigns or merchants for trade, or are you
merely seeking supplies of water and fuel?? They re-
plied, ‘ We are not messengers of our sovereign, but are
merely seeking provisions and fuel.’ They asked our
people how many troops were here, and our people re-
plied, that they did not know the exact number, but that
the head officers knew, for they had the books where the
account was kept. They inquired who was the principal
officer in the expedition, and our people asked in reply who
was the principal officer among them conducting their
ships. Neither party gave any information. The white
people asked, how long it was since we left Imerina, we re-
plied three months ; they asked what we ate, wereplied, rice,
which we brought with us. They then asked how many
cannons we carried with us, we told them several. How
many have you on the water? they told us 250. Whose

36 NATIVE LETTER.

land is this, said they, in these parts? This island is
Ranavalomanjaka’s, we replied ; the island does not be-
long to two sovereigns, but to Ranavalomanjaka alone.
If it is hers alone, said they, how is it there is no flag
hoisted here? for at Tamatave, Foul Point, Iharana, and
Ifenoarivo, and all the eastern parts, there are flags; here
there is none. We replied, Ranavalomanjaka has no
dispute with foreigners, our friendship with them remains
as it was in the time of Radama; Ranavalomanjaka does
not change it, so you white people retire, and do not
mingle with the enemy, for we have some affairs to
arrange with these rebels. The white people said, Yes,
we will retire; nevertheless they did not, but remained
with the enemy. Our soldiers then went forward to
surround the town, and having got near it, the ships
changed their position, so as to lie directly opposite the
troops. The chief officer directed the soldiers to retreat,
and withdraw them, lest they should suffer. We have
never before seen so many ships, said the officers; even
while Radama was living, there never were twenty-one
ships together in one harbour like these ; we have never
fought with the white people, let us move our encamp-
ment a little further, out of the reach of their cannon.
The officers remained there five days, waiting for a mes-
sage from the foreigners. They at length sent to request to
have some cattle, and we sent them eleven head, in the
name of the queen; eleven of the ships accepted the pre-
sent. The other detachments of our troops having re-
turned to us, we commenced our journey back to
Imerina, and so ends the account of our journey,” saith R.

Most of these vessels were American whalers, and of
AMERICAN WHALERS, 37

course had no intention of making any attack on the
queen’s troops. They were glad, however, that it so
occurred, that they had it in their power, simply by their
appearance, to overawe the Hovas, and preserve from im-
pending ruin the feeble and terrified inhabitants of that
part of the country.

If so many American‘ whalers find it worth while to
visit these seas, might it not be worth the attention also
of the merchants of this country? The English have
been always courteously received by the chiefs and people
of St. Augustine’s; and at the present time might form
any establishments among them they wished. The natives
would consent to dispose of tracts of land for fair though
moderate remuneration, and a considerable trade might
soon be established with Port Natal and the Eastern coast
of Africa. A settlement there might interpose some
check also to the Portuguese slave traffic along the, Mo-
zambique country.

About the time the army just mentioned left the capital,
a French trader residing there, proposed to the queen to
take a cargo of rice from Mananjary to St. Augustine’s
Bay to meet her troops by the time they should reach
there. The government, being pleased with the proposal,
authorised the party to engage a French vessel for the
purpose. It was reported that the real object was to take
a cargo of slaves from St. Augustine’s to Mananjary, to be
employed on a large sugar plantation and arrack manu-
factory there. The governor of Mauritius having become
acquainted with these arrangements, immediately de-
spatched a frigate or sloop of war in search of the vessel,
and to afford the means of escape to any Europeans who

38 ST. AUGUSTINE’S.

might happen to be in the neighbourhood of St. Augus-
tine’s Bay, when the queen’s troops should arrive there,
especially as it was announced that there were Europeans
residing there as traders, and that the Hovas would treat
them as their enemies. The French trader arrived the
day after the sloop had left the port, and having heard of
her visit, became alarmed and put to sea again; he re-
turned in about a month, and found that the queen’s
troops had been there and left, and that the sloop had
not been there since. He then hoisted the English flag, pre-
tended to have. a cargo of merchandise on sale, such as mus-
kets, powder, cloth, &c. and invited the chieftam on board.
The latter refused to go himself, but sent seven of his
people, some of them his near relations, and as soon as
they were safely on board, the vessel made off with them ;
two jumped overboard, and were drowned. The remain-
ing five were put on shore at Fort Dauphin, and brought
up by land to the capital. Three only arrived there, and
these were put to death at Antanjambato immediately on
their arrival ; what became of the other two is unknown.
The troops returned home in October with about 1000
captives, being less than half the number they had taken
prisoners. The troops suffered much from want of pro-
visions, and lost upwards of 1100 men. A great mortality
had also happened among the bourgeois.

Alarmed in some measure by the fact of there having
been so many vessels at St. Augustine’s Bay, and not
understanding exactly how it had occurred, the queen’s
government determined on sending an embassy to Eng~-
land to assure the British government that the queen’s
friendship towards his Britannic Majesty had undergone
EMBASSY TO ENGLAND. 39

no change! The embassy reached the Mauritius in
September, 1836. They were received with many marks
of attention by his excellency the governor, Sir William
Nicolay, and then proceeded to England. They had
several interviews with Lord Palmerston, and were intro-
duced to his late Majesty, William IV. No important
results, either of a public or commercial character, arose
out of their visit. They returned home, and were re-
ceived with honour by their sovereign, but no change
whatever has taken place in the policy of the native go-
vernment.

About the time the embassy left the capital on their way
to the coast, Ratsimanisa, with 6000 troops, was despatched
tothe south ; Rainingitabe with 2000 to the north, and Ra-
valontsalama with 3000 to the west. All these returned
home in September or October. Ratsimanisa had destroyed
upwards of 4000 men in one day, and carried home with
him upwards of 9000 captives. On his arrival in the
Betsileo country, messengers were sent out by him in
every direction to invite the people to assemble, and to
assure them that he was only sent by the queen to ad-
minister to them the oath of allegiance, and to take their
muskets and spears, &c. to Imerina. Having thus col-
lected all the inhabitants he could, he ordered them to
divide themselves into three parties, the first consisting of
the adults who were capable of carrying arms ; the second
the youths who were about four feet high, and the third,
all the women and children. The men then were all
bound, ‘a ceremony insisted on, and too tamely submitted
to, as a form in which they were to take the oath. They
were then ordered to accompany the soldiers to a spot
40 MURDER OF TEN THOUSAND.

near a large morass about a mile distant. The impossi-
bility of escape across the marshy swamp was the
real reason for choosing the place,—the ostensible reason
would be, the contiguity of a pool of water, required for
the purpose of administering the oath, one part of which
consists in striking the water with their spears.

On arriving at the place, and being surrounded by the
troops in the rear, the fatal drum was ordered to beat, and
every one of the natives was put to death on the spot !
An examination was then made of the youths, and all who
were found to be even half an inch in stature above the given
though arbitrary standard which the officers had carried
with them by the queen’s instructions, were placed by them-
selves, and soon shared the fate of their fathers. The cries
of the women and children were most distressing. These
of course had no effect on their ruthless conquerors. On
his return home, the queen highly praised the commanding
officer for his consummate skill and success, observing
that she had no officer to be compared with him, in getting
captives and obtaining booty !

Rainingitabe returned from his expedition in the north
with about 1000 captives, after putting to death upwards
of 400 men. He had encountered a pretty sharp struggle
with the enemy, and many had fallen on both sides.

Ravalontsalama, having also killed about 400 of the
enemy, returned home with 700 captives.

These details are sufficient to illustrate the position ad-
vanced in the commencement of this chapter, that the
military character of the queen’s government is desolating
the whole island, and proving as ruinous in the long run
to the Hovas themselves, as to the provinces they subju-

FANOMPOANA. 41

gate. The country is full of disaffection, and on the verge
of anarchy, and so far may be preparing for a change
favourable to its interests.

Besides the severe military service exacted of the
people, there is also a large amount of labour imposed on
them in the civil department. All service paid to
government is called ‘‘ Fanompoana,” which properly
means the stated work of servants. In principle, it
therefore treats all the people as the servants, and not
merely as the subjects, of the government. In character,
it considerably resembles the feudal service of former
times in Europe, unaccompanied, however, by any re-
deeming stipulations in favour of the people. It is
imposed on the whole mass of the population wherever
the authority of the sovereign is completely established,
that is to say, wherever the power exists to enforce the
service, and it can be exercised with impunity. As
already mentioned, the people not employed in military
service are called bourgeois; and these, it may be safely
affirmed, are employed in the Fanompoana, by orders of
their task-exacting government, not less than three weeks
out of the four. In this department of civil service,
officers are appointed, holding the same rank and titles
as those in the military service, from corporals to
generals. Hence, no native of Madagascar, under the
Hova government, can be considered a freeman. ll
that are not in the military service are enrolled for civil
service, aud the latter is as oppressive as the former.
No man is allowed even to leave his home for a single
day without first obtaining permission from his superior
officer, and the favour is frequently obtained only by
42 BETTING.

bribery ; or if permission be obtained to visit the coast,
it may be for a few weeks, for purposes of traffic, it is
often obtained only on condition that half the profits
realized be given to the officer who grants the permission.
By a similar stipulation, all the Betsimisaraka, (the
people living at and near Tamatave,) who go over in
charge of cattle to Mauritius, pay half their wages to
their superior officers. The officers are called the
“ Mpifehy,” “tiers up,” “ binders,” signifying that they
collect and keep the people in their respective classes for
service. In the time of Radama, the officers called
Ambonijato, (literally, over hundreds,) centurions, had
under their command the full complement of a hundred
men each. Many of these are now reduced to ten, twelve,
or fifteen each, the rest having been drawn to the army,
or having died, or removed from other causes. Still the
service imposed remains the same. No matter how
many, or how few compose the nominal “ zato,” or
“hundred,” each division of the people so called, must
perform its full share of ‘ Fanompoana.”

A great hardship is frequently imposed on them, also,
by the absurd practice of Miloka, that is, of betting to a
large amount by one party against another, to finish a
certain amount of labour first. The head officers of one
district make the bet, say one thousand dollars, that the
people under them shall complete their task before those
of another district, or pay the amount. The party fail-
ing in the task, of course pays the bet, or fine. The
party receiving the fine must then help the party paying
it; but the people are the losers in both cases. They
pay the money, and the officers alone share it. The
THE PEOPLE, THE LOSERS. — 43

people, who have laboured incessantly that their party
may win, must still help the others who have, unfor-
tunately, lost; and those who are helped must still con-
tinue working, though they have paid their money. The
jackals fmd the provender, quarrel among themselves
who shall bring it first, and the lion, having got it, eats
all without even tossing them a bone.

In other cases, the military officers and the judges
persuade the mpifehy to bet, that the people under them
shall finish a given task for the government within such a
time, taking care to fix so short a period that it would be
next to an impossibility to complete so much within so
short a space. If the work be not finished, the people
have to pay a large amount to the officers and judges,
though these parties run no risk. They divide the spoil
among themselves, generally giving a fair share of it to
the mpifehy, lest they should oppose such a measure
the next time it might be proposed. Many families have
been reduced to slavery by being compelled to pay such
heavy fines as these. They must pay their share, and if
they happen not to have it ready, they must borrow, and
if not able to repay it, the interest, often at ten per cent.
per month, soon amounts to so large a sum that payment
in money is out of ‘the question, and the borrower must
sell himeelf into slavery.

Some hundreds of the people have thus been sold for
debts, and continue in slavery, either for life, or till their
friends can and will redeem them.

The betting just described is often employed when the
service consists of carrying timber from the forest to the
capital. |
44 DRAGGING TIMBER.

Besides the “ Fanompoana” thus rendered to the
government, the people are frequently required to per-
form service for the favourites of Her Majesty by her
orders. The inhabitants of a whole district, it may be,
are sent, en masse, to the forest to fetch timber to build
a large new residence; the distance is, perhaps, fifty,
sixty, or even a hundred miles. They must go at a
given time, and deliver the timber required within a
given period. The labour of dragging is almost incre-
dible. Often from fifty to a hundred men are employed
dragging a single piece. Neither cattle nor horses are
employed in the work. The people receive no pay, nor
are even provisions found them ; and those who are too
poor to provide enough for themselves, perish of hunger
on the road.

Commands for work of this kind are published in the
markets of the respective districts. The orders are not
only numerous, but often contradictory, and the people
are plunged into the greatest perplexity, lest, in deciding
which orders are to be obeyed, when they clash with one
another, they should do wrong, and then have to pay
heavy fines, or be reduced to slavery, for their error.

Some thousands of the people are employed in the con-
stant service of the government, as carpenters, builders,
smiths, tanners, shoemakers, gun-makers, soap-boilers,
fellers of timber, &c. These have no time whatever
allowed them for themselves. They are all ranked in
the class of Hovas, or Freemen, but are, in fact, the
slaves of the government. Having no time allowed them,
even for the cultivation of their little plats of rice-ground,
their families are reduced to the utmost distrees and
SERVICE OF THE WOMEN. 45

wretchedness. As an instance of the sufferings of the
people, in consequence of this ceaseless demand on their
labours, it may be mentioned, that some time since,
while the offal from the markets was being delivered in,
at one of the government stores, where nitre is manufac-
tured, some of the half-famished sufferers, pinched with
extreme hunger, actually stole, while opportunity offered,
the almost putrid ears of the cattle, and devoured them
with the greatest avidity !

The women, also, are compelled to take their share in
certain kinds of this feudal service. Various honorary
distinctions are conferred on them, corresponding with
the degrees of honour conferred on the other sex. They
proceed from the third honour to the twelfth; and it is
said, that those of the higher ranks frequently exercise
their authority over their inferiors in a manner quite at
variance with the usual characteristic gentleness of their
sex. They are employed in spinning and weaving for
the queen and her government. Once a week they also
are required to carry materials, however offensive, to the
government manufacture at Analakely.

Whenever government orders are issued, they are
required to be promptly and perfectly obeyed. Hence,
the people often suffer by being deprived of the only
opportunity of securing their harvests. Just at the mo-
ment, it may be, when the rice is fit to cut, some public
service is demanded of them ; the crops must be left till
that service is completed, even though, in the mean time,
they should wholly perish, or be destroyed by showers of
hail, to which the harvest season is frequently subject.

And here it may be remarked, that in consequence of
46 EXPENSIVENESS OF RICE.

these large demands made on the time of the people,
they are not able to cultivate so much land as formerly,
and hence many have severely suffered from famine.
During the past three or four years, it is believed, that
many have not been able to procure more than one meal
a day, for some months in each year, and that others
have scarcely procured rice at all, but have subsisted on
manioc, a coarse species of yam.

In Radama’s time, rice had been usually sold in the
markets for eight or ten measures the dollar; at present,
only three or four can be obtained, and sometimes only
one!

Some very ineffectual measures have been adopted to
regulate and moderate the price of corn in the markets.
A law was issued about four years ago, that the fixed
price in the market should be seven measures to the
dollar. The people preferred hoarding it up—the mar-
kets were not sufficiently supplied, and many who could
have purchased, nearly perished with hunger. The law
was, of course, repealed, and the people were ordered to
plant more manioc. Many, however, disheartened at the
very limited supplies brought to market, fancied their
soil was less productive than formerly, and almost
attributed the difference to some spell, operating in the
country, under the malign influence of the Europeans,
who had, they thought, left their country in displeasure,
in consequence of the queen’s proceedings, and by some
secret witchcraft had brought these disasters on them in
retaliation. Others again interpreted their national
calamities into a: marked manifestation of the divine dis-
approbation, and fancied they saw the hand of a retribu-
MILITARY EXERCISE. 44

tive Providence in thus punishing them for the sin of
rejecting the volume of revelation, and the means of
grace. The first party must be quite wrong, and the
second may not be quite correct ; but, “verily there is a
God that judgeth in the earth.”

The oppressive character of the military service has
been already adverted to. One or two additional illustra-
tions may, however, be offered. The officers, from the
highest to the lowest, are the instruments of the op-
pression, and every one under the hope of gain— Auri
sacra fames.” The only reward the soldiers obtain is
about a week’s rice in a year! And though it is pre-
tended, in the theory of the service, that each soldier
should have sufficient time allowed him to cultivate his
own plat of ground, it amounts, practically, to nothing.
All that are not absent on some expedition are required to
exercise once a fortnight ; and then, mstead of returning
home, they are required to remain for a time, in case
there should be any service to perform for the queen.
And this pretence is kept up by their officers to force the
soldiers, in their eagerness to get home, to procure per-
mission to do so by some petty bribe. Those who have
net a sous to offer are sometimes kept even till the next
exercise day comes round. During the delay, they are
often compelled to perform work for their officers, such
as planting rice, &c.; and, in the event of neglecting it,
must pay a fine, or, if unable to pay, must suffer a severe’
flogging.

These poor creatures are moreover often employed
when the queen is desirous of “‘laolao,” play, or amuse-
48 IDIOTS, AND BULL-FIGHTING.

ment; and their part consists in collecting fighting-bulls
for the royal game of bull-fight; or for an amusement
far more pitiable and degrading to humanity itself, col-
lecting a number of idiots, that they may dance for the
gratification of Her Majesty and the court, in the royal
presence. Unless they find both classes when required,
they are flogged, and that severely too! and hence fight-
ing-bulls and idiots are frequently sought for, fifty or
sixty miles distance from the capital, and immense trouble
is given to the soldiers to conduct them to the assigned
spot for the sport. So severe are the floggings inflicted,
both on the military and the bourgeois, that many have
died under the blows, or in consequence of them. In
other cases, by a refinement of cruelty, the soldiers have
been punished by being compelled to march backward
and forward through a marshy spot of ground till com-
pletely exhausted, and many have died from exhaustion.
Formerly, the soldiers were placed, for punishment, in
public stocks, and kept there for months, by day and
night, exposed to all changes of weather ; and in that
miserable condition they have been known to perish.

The people living at a distance from the capital are
almost as constantly employed in some government
service, as those residing under the immediate inspection
of the officers at head-quarters. There may be policy in
this,—kept in hard service, the people have not even time
to mature a scheme of rebellion. The Betsimisaraka on
the eastern coast are almost always employed in collect-
ing gums, carrying ebony for sale for the queen, or
building some kind of fortification along the coast, which
BEES-WAX. 49.

the natives, with no little pride, call “ batteries,” but
which the firing even of a single salute would shake to
the foundation. ,

: In 1836, a vessel arrived at Majanga with cannon to
sell; the government purchased several in exchange for
gum copal, bees’-wax, hides, &c. A sufficient quantity
of gum copal could not be found on the western coast,
and hence the people on the eastern coast were ordered
to collect some there, and were obliged to carry what
they collected, amounting to several thousand burdens,
on their shoulders, across the country to the other side of
the island. At the same time, the people to the east of
the capital were required to furnish the government with
a certain number of cakes of bees’-wax; they were
busily employed collecting it in the forest for several
weeks ; and being pressed by the government to deliver
_it, some of those who had not their portion ready were
tempted to impose on the government, by making some
refuse into the shape of the cake, and covering it with
bees’-wax. On reaching the capital the trick was found
out, and all who were concerned in it were sold into
slavery.

Amidst all these oppressions of the government, hun-
dreds and thousands of the people have, in despair, de-
serted their villages and all their peaceful occupations,
and have fled with their families to the forests. Many
villages in the Betsimisaraka country, which formerly
contained several hundred families, contain now no more
than ten or fifteen families. Robbers and highwaymen
have fearfully increased ; and though hundreds of them
are annually executed at the capital, their number con-

D
50° CRUEL PUNISHMENTS.

tinues to increase. In fact, the executions have become
so frequent that the government often direct criminals to
be put to death privately at midnight, lest the people
should at length be aroused by this wholesale destruction
of their countrymen, and rise to avenge their cause.

The most cruel methods of putting to death have also
been invented. Sometimes capital punishment has been
inflicted by spearing, or by cutting the throat—by throw-
ing over a rock—putting the head into a hole dug in the
earth, and then pouring boiling water on the victim—
burning alive—crucifying, or tying fast to a tree, or a
pole, and leaving the wretched sufferer to expire there in
agony, or to be eaten alive by dogs. In fact, the very
dogs seem to have become more savage, from having so
many more victims than formerly. It has become dan-
gerous even to pass, after dusk, the hill Ambohipotsy,
where ‘criminals are usually executed. Three or four
years ago, a female slave, with her child on her back,
went there to collect some dry grass for fuel; the child
was asleep; she laid it down, covered with a piece of
rofia cloth, and went about collecting grass; but not
proceeding, perhaps, more than fifty yards from the spot
where she had left the child. On returning there, how-
ever, she found her infant had been attacked, and was
already half-devoured by the dogs!
WITHOUT GOD. "51

CHAPTER III.

Native religion of the Malagasy ; ideas of God—Their idolatry—
Charms—Places at which they offer worship—The soul—Death

» —Curious anecdote in the “ Manao afana’—Divination—
Witchcraft—Ordeal of Tangena—Votive offerings—Moral
character.

“ Lrvrne without hope and without God in the world,” is
a description of the moral state of a people, as justly ap-
plicable to the inhabitants of Madagascar as it was when
originally employed by an inspired apostle to the Ephe-
sians in theiridolatrous condition. Scarcely any term is
in more constant use among the natives of Madagascar
than that by which they designate ‘‘ God,’”* and hence
at first sight it might seem too severe to affirm of them,
that they are “without God.”’ Yet, perhaps, no other
word in the language is employed with so much indefinite-
ness and irreconcileable contradiction as this. If by the
word God we properly understand one infinite, eternal,
intelligent, holy, and ever blessed spirit, the Creator and
Governor of the Universe, the Malagasy are in the state
above described, for they attach no elevated idea of the
kind to the term, however frequently found on their lips.
Idolatry does not teach it. It leads far away from it.
Idol worship bewilders and perplexes, deludes and de-
stroys. The knowledge of the true God once lost, is

* Andriamanitra, which means literally the “ fragrant prince,”’
or “noble ;”? or emphatically, “ the fragrant.”

D2
52 IDEAS OF GOD.

never regained, but by the aid of revelation ; and till the
light of revelation illuminate and raise the mind of the
Malagasy, it will continue fearfully true of his position,
that he is without God; and as painfully true, that he is
“without hope;” for on what basis can the hope of a
fallen creature rest, from whose mind God is excluded ?

That some superior being, power, genius, or influence
is intended by the native expression, God, is unquestion-
able ; but what precise notion is affixed to it in the mind
of a native, it is extremely difficult to ascertain. The
Malagasy have no idea that the world is self-created ;"they
affirm that God is the creator, and that he resides some-
where far above, in heaven. But then the title is not
restricted to that being. It is equally applied to all the
numerous idols they worship, taken individually and collec-
tively. This, however, would not create much difficulty,
as the idols might be regarded as the representatives of
God. But the term is also employed to denote the state
of the dead. ‘‘ He is gone to be God,” is an expression
commonly used of any one deceased, an idea that seems to
involve something of the Pantheistic theology. Then
again, the same term is applied to the sovereign, not
merely as an adjective, “‘ divine,’ but as a noun, “ our
divinity ;” it is applied to the “‘ genius” of their tangena,
used in their ordeals, and frequently, to any phenomenon
of nature, or curiosity in manufactures, beyond their
comprehension. The elementary notion of a God being
thus vague, we are little surprised to find their whole
religious system indefinite, discordant, puerile, and in-
effective.

The religious creed of the natives of Madagascar, if
ORIGIN OF NATIVE CREED. 53

that term may be at all applied to the few and confused
notions entertained on the subject, seems to be a compound
of most heterogeneous elements, borrowed in part from
the superstitious fears and practices of Africa, in part from
the opinions of the ancient Egyptians, and in part from
the prevalent systems of idolatry in India, blended with
the usages of the inhabitants of the Malayan Archipelago,
to some of whom a portion of the natives of Madagascar
evidently owe their origin. Still, it can scarcely be said
that a creed exists. Usages exist, and the religious no-
tion of a Malagasy must be sought for rather in the prac-
tice than in the theory, and hardly ten natives could be
found assigning the same reason even for those practices,
except indeed the unsatisfactory one that “ these things
are done now because their ancestors did so before them.”
A Malagasy is the victim of puerile fears, from his in-
fancy to his old age. He fancies himself perpetually ex-
posed to some invisible, but malignant, influences, and
hence is anxious to guard himself by charms and amu-
lets, and by carefully avoiding to give offence to the idols
he recognises and worships, by any violation of their
“‘ fady,”” or prohibitory regulations. The general notion
of these charms or amulets corresponds with that so ex-
tensively prevalent throughout Africa. The charms, or
“ody,” derive their mysterious virtue from some inex-
plicable link of association with the “‘ sampy,’’ or idols,
and yet these latter possess no inherent power till they have
been ‘* constituted” by a process of ceremonies performed
on them; after which, whatever the material may be of
which they are made, (and it is usually wood,) the object
becomes God, and is worshipped as God, and confided in,
54 ANECDOTE.

by its deluded votary, as having power to bless and to with-
hold blessings. This practice, called by the natives
‘“* manangana,” to raise up, nearly corresponds with the
Hindoo notion of the Pran Pratisht’ha; that is, of im-
parting animation to the object selected for worship. The
people obtain their idols as property belonging to the
family, and passing from one generation to another; or
they purchase them of some person supposed to be famous
for the success of those who purchase their gods of him.
He makes and constitutes them, and the cost is a matter of
bargain between the buyer and the seller.*

Every individual in the country may have as many
charms as he pleases, or can afford to maintain. He de-
termines for himself also, by inclination or circumstances,

* A married couple went, some few years since, to a person
of this description, living about fifteen miles from the capital, and
wished to purchase an idol. He had none to sell, but desired
them to come next day. They went; he was still without any,
but promised to have one by the evening. They remained till
evening. The man went to a neighbouring forest, selected his
tree, cut down a large bough, brought it home, and prepared his
idol, leaving the smaller branches littered about near his fire-
place. In the evening he invited our married friends to take
their meal of rice with him, and they saw him put some of these
self-same branches in the fire to boil the rice. They returned
home, having paid about two dollars for their new god. Shortly
afterwards a young man, a Christian, called at their house, and
happened to read to the wife that graphic description of idolatry,
in the 44th chapter of Isaiah, “With part thereof he roasteth roast,
maketh a fire, warmeth himself, and the residue thereof, he
maketh a god, &c.” She was astonished. It reminded her of
what had just occurred, helped to convince her of the truth of
the sacred volume, awakened deep attention, and led to the
abandonment of the idol. She continued a learner; became a
true disciple, and is now well known as Rafaravavy.
TUTELARY GODS. 55

as to the idol or idols he will have in his house, and
whether any or none. Most families, or clans, have their
own idols respectively, and to these somewhat greater
honour is attached than to those belonging to individuals.
There are some also considered as the guardian idols of
the sovereign and kingdom; these, of course, claim
greater homage than the rest, and are regarded with
deeper awe. Nearly all these are domestic divinities, and
of any shape, size, and name, their makers may choose to
have giventhem. They have seldom any resemblance to
the human form ; but consist of uncouth pieces of wood,
that might be conveniently carried in one’s pocket, and
ornamented fantastically, just as taste directs, or means
can be afforded. The general notion of them seems to
correspond with the tutelary gods of the ancients, rather
than with the greater gods of Greek and Romah mytho-
logy. They are perhaps nearly identical with the Tera-
phim, mentioned in the account of Laban, who seems to
have been more frightened about the loss of his ‘“ images,”
than grieved for the departure of his daughters, and
Jacob, and all the cattle the latter had obtained.

There are no public temples in honour of any divinity,
nor any order of men exclusively devoted to the priest-
hood. The houses in which the principal idols are kept
are considered in some way sacred. People are not per-
mitted to enter them, but with the sanction and under the
direction of the keeper of the idol, who usually resides in
the house. He it is who receives the offerings of the
people, intended as acts of worship, or sacrifices to the
idol; he it is who presents the requests or prayers of the
people, and who professes to give the responses of the
56 DESTINY.

idol or god, and those responses are usually said to be
audible, that is, the keeper pretends that by listening with
his ear close down to the divinity, he catches his meaning ;
so, at any rate, he entraps the credulous worshipper into
the belief of it, and receives the fee for his services.

The notion of some supreme or superior being is not
associated in the mind of the natives with any idea of a
Supreme Ruler, or of moral government. So far as
their minds are exercised at all on such matters, they
seem rather believers in fate than Providence; and they
consider that each one’s fate is determined by the age and
position in the heavens of the moon, at the moment of his
birth. An evil fate, or destiny, may, however, they
think, be averted, by certain ceremonies. That fate is
somewhat regarded as a distinct personal divinity ; since
it is believed that every individual has his own proper and
personal divinity, and that his fate infallibly corresponds
with the condition of that divinity ; if the latter be rich, he
will be rich ; if poor, he will be poor; if renowned and
powerful, so will he ; and if the reverse, obscure and feeble,
he must yield to so unenviable a condition. This fate is
called either his vintana, “ destiny,” or his andriama-
nitra, “ god.”

The Malagasy offer their worship usually at the graves
or tombs of their ancestors, who are thought in some way
to have become God, although retaining their identity
sufficiently to be distinct objects of worship. Over a.
large part of Madagascar, there are ancient tombs, called
vazimba, and thought to contain the ashes of some of the
earliest inhabitants or aborigines of the soil. Though
few of these are kept in repair, great respect is paid to
JEWISH CUSTOMS. 57

the ‘* manes” supposed to bein them, and much dread of
incurring their displeasure by any contemptuous neglect
of them, is entertained.

The natives of Madagascar have scarcely any relics of
Sabean worship, though a few are said to pay their devo-
tion to the rising sun, and always to face the sun in pay-
ing their devotions. In their astrology, the moon holds
the chief place; but receives no worship. Fire is not
worshipped in any part of the island.

Some Jewish or Mohammedan customs prevail in the.
island, probably introduced by the Arab traders; such
as circumcision, the hebdomadal division of time, and
abstinence from swine’s flesh, (which is almost universal).
Their new year is ushered in with many religious cere-
monies, some of which seem to have an obscure relation
to the Jewish passover: the preparations for it extend
through two or three days; purifying and bathing are
universal on the occasion, cattle are killed, an early and
hasty meal is prepared; blood is sprinkled on the pillars
and door-posts of their houses, where it remains through
the year, and general festivity ensues.

Caste, such as belongs to the Brahminical institutes of
India, does not exist in Madagascar. Clanship prevails,
and few marriages take place excepting among those of
the same clan. The rite of marriage is general, poly-
gamy is prevalent, divorce almost as much so, and fidelity
to the marriage covenant little expected, and less to be
found. ;

The belief of the Malagasy, with respect to the soul,

might be given in few words. They have no appropri-

ate word for soul in the language, and hence, itis obvious,
D3
58 GHOSTS.

have no just notions on the subject. There are several
words in use that belong to their psychological system,
such as it is, but they do not approach the true notion of
an immaterial and immortal spirit ; they describe rather
the character of the individual as mild, generous, stern or
cruel; or the ghost of the deceased, and the phantom,
shade, or appearance of the ghost. Still, all this is as
confused as their notions in theology. A Malagasy tells
you, when asked on the subject, that at death there is an
extinction of his being, that he has no idea of any here-
after, that his body isto become dust, and his life becomes
air or wind. Still some representation of him, he thinks,
remains, and is in fact his ghost. The living have a
great dread of being visited by the ghost, and earnestly
entreat the dead not to revisit them. They pay them
honours to keep them quiet, and pay their graves pro-
found respect, so as not to irritate their occupants. The
“ avelo,” however—the ghost—sometimes appears, and if
no kind entreaties will suffice to prevent the recurrence
of such a calamity, powerful means are used not only to
“Jay,” but to destroy it. It is then believed to be de-
stroyed, much to the anguish of the friends of the de-
ceased.

The process of killing the avelo, or ghost, is sufficiently
simple. The boughs of certain trees are cut down for
the purpose, and brought just before sunset to the grave
of the restless visitant. The parties troubled with his un-
welcome visits beat his grave with the boughs, exclaim-
ing, “Why are you so restless? Have you not a suffi-
ciently good grave to repose in? Why do you come to
annoy us?” Then returning to the house or houses he had
DESTROYING THE GHOST.—ANECDOTE. 59

annoyed, they beat the walls on all sides with their boughs
completely to drive him away; then burn the boughs,
collect the ashes, put them into a seven-fold plaited basket,
and carefully place the basket with its contents on the
grave already beaten; and thus have for ever put out of
existence the troublesome sprite.

Amidst all this uncertainty and contradiction, the na-
tives have an idea that there is a place somewhere in the
country called Ambondrombé, where all the deceased are
assembled, and where, marvellous enough, all are again
exactly what they were before they died; kings and
queens are kings and queens—nobles, nobles—freemen,
freemen—and slaves, slaves ; all pursue the same favourite
employments they followed while living, and possess the
actual property they had previously enjoyed.*

* A curious illustration of this notion took place some time
since. An elderly man, anxious to make sure of the ceremony
called ‘* Manao afana,’’ which is always made after death, being
performed for him, determined on seeing it done before his
death. Cattle are, on occasions of this ceremony, killed as a
kind of peace offering and farewell to the departed, and they are
supposed to go to the departed in Ambondrombé. The old gentle.
man killed about thirty head of cattle, and was much praised
for his sagacity by those who shared the meat he had so
liberally distributed. Another native, who had stood by, and
overheard the people lavish in their praises, began to question
the wisdom of the scheme after all. ‘ You have killed the cattle,
certainly,” said he, “and they are gone, you suppose, toawait youin
Ambondrombé; but who will take care of them there for you?’
‘+ Why astothat,” said he, “it didn’t occur to me; however, I’m on
the right side still; three of my slaves died lately, and they will
know them and take charge of them.” ‘ I question that,” said
his incredulous friend; “did you tell them what you meant to
do, so that they might expect them?” “No,” said he, “I had not
made up my mind then on the business.” “Then,” said his friend,
60 DIVINATION,

The Malagasy are devout believers in divination, and
in lucky and unlucky days. This gives rise to two classes
of men among them—the Mpisikidy, or Diviners, and the
Mpanandro, Astrologers. The divination is worked on
almost all occasions, and is regarded as nearly infallible,
—indeed quite so, if the parties do nothing themselves to
eounteract its decisions. They have a different method
of working it, with beans, grain of rice, &c., or lines
drawn on a sand-board, and in all which the materials
can be so disposed by the skilful and the crafty, as to ap-
pear to dictate what the diviner himself wishes.*

“see what trouble they'll be in; your cattle arrive, and as this is
quite a new thing to make the afana before death, of which they
never heard, they will conclude you also have come; they’ll go
wandering about in search of you all over the place, and not
finding you they will conclude you have lost your way, and to
save themselves trouble, they’ll give away your cattle, and you'll
never be able to get them again.” The poor man was aghast,
and could make no reply to the reasoning. Our friend who so
puzzled him had been a believer in the Scriptures, and took out
his New Testament, and read to him the resurrection of Laza-
rus, explained the Scripture doctrine of the future state, and left,
it is hoped, a favourable impression on the minds of many who
had collected around them during their conversation.

* The divination seems to be in constant requisition by the
queen. She could scarcely venture to take even an ordinary
meal of rice without having it worked ten or a dozen times.
First, the diviners must decide from what class of the people the
rice is to be obtained; then in what direction it may be fetched ;
then who is to fetch it, in what kind of basket; who is to cook
it,— with what fuel; in what dish to serve it up; on which side it
is to be served out; what may be eaten with it, drank with it,
&c. &c. And all this makes up an essential part of the serious
business of life! All this is thought needful to guard against
witchcraft and sorcery. One cannot look at these things with-
out feeling humbled at such an immense waste of mind,
INFANTICIDE.——-WITCHCRAFT. 61

On the calculation of lucky and unlucky days depends
the fate of many a helpless infant. If, judging from
the time of its birth, its destiny is concluded to be male-
volent, it is put to death by suffocation.* Where the
destiny may possibly be averted, one plan adopted for
that purpose is to place the infant at the entrance of a
cattle-fold, and then to drive in the cattle, and if the child
is not destroyed, its evil fate is declared to be averted ;
—if trampled on and killed, it is sufficiently manifest its
fate could not be averted. Those who escape death in
such a case, are thought to be destined to become exceed-
ingly rich in after life.

The most fatal among all the superstitions of the
Malagasy is their belief in witchcraft and sorcery. All
persons are liable to fall under a suspicion of these mys-
terious agencies, and then of being put to a dreadful
ordeal to ascertain whether they are guilty or not. It is
believed that they may fall under such influence, even
unconsciously to themselves; but as they would even then
be equally dangerous to the community with those who
were wilfully guilty, they are subjected to the same test.
In theory it is thought that those who have no bad de-
signs of their own would not be injured by the ordeal,

* The usual method pursued is that of tying a cord slightly
round the infant’s neck, so as to render breathing difficult, though
not impossible, and then holding its head down by force in a
shallow pan of water, till life is extinct.

Some classes of the people, those called b/ack especially, are
more liable to have their children cut off than others, perhaps as
a@ matter of state policy. A poor woman called one day on a
missionary and acknowledged that four out of her five children
had been destroyed in the manner described,
62 TANGENA ORDEAL.

severe as it is. ‘To be pronounced innocent by the or-
deal removes a man above suspicion, however clear else
may be the proof of his guilt ; to be condemned by it is
a demonstration of guilt, however strong the proof of his
innocence may be on other grounds. The ordeal con-
sists in administering an emetic draught, formed of the
nut of the tangena, (Cerbera Tangena,) accompanied
with a portion of the juice of the banana tree. This
draught acts on a stomach previously supplied with a
large meal of boiled rice; after eating which, three pieces
of the skin of a fowl, killed for the occasion, are swal-
lowed. If the three pieces are returned from the
stomach, innocence is demonstrated, the party is pro-
nounced “ Velona,” “living,” and in due time led up by
his friends to his village with much pomp and ceremony,
as “ Madio,” “pure;” if the skin remain, guilt has
seized its victim; a large rice pestle is used as a club,
and terminates, on the spot, the sufferings and fears of
the party; or if he be a slave belonging to the people,
(and not to the sovereign or the nobility,) he is sent to
some distant part of the country and sold, where happily
no report of his being under a malevolent influence may
have reached.

It is difficult to ascertain the numbers that actually
perish by this fearful ordeal. It is sometimes adminis-
tered in a very wholesale manner, as may be illustrated
in the following circumstance: About eighty men came
to the capital, about six years ago, to take the oath of
allegiance from a distant part of the island. They were
detained, by order of the queen’s government, at a village
in the neighbourhood. The lightning that season having
SUPERSTITION AND CRUELTY.~—DEATH. 63

proved most terrific and fatal, it was charged on these
strangers, that they had employed some sorcery to bring
down the “varatra,” thunderbolt, to destroy the queen’s
people. Soldiers were sent to the village, and the eighty
men were compelled to take the tangena. About half
the number were convicted of the charge, and ordered
for death. The under-ground rice granaries or pits
were taken. for the purpose, the victims thrown in,
boiling water poured on them, and they perished by the
scalding and suffocation. The rest were afterwards, on
further suspicions being entertained against them, sub-
jected to the same wretched fate, and the whole number
thus unjustly perished. It was, however, gravely be-
lieved, that they had some powerful charms about them,
which would resist death by any means that could be
used, unless it were first neutralized; and that was
effected by cutting off the head of a black dog, and
tossing it, reeking with blood, into the hole among the
agonized victims, before the stone was finally covered on
the mouth of the pit to which they were consigned.
Hope in death is a privilege with which heathenism is
little acquainted. A Malagasyhas none. To him death
terminates all his enjoyments. His shadowy notions
about Ambondrombé, and his property and happiness
there, which might amuse him while in health, have no
consoling or cheering influence on his mind in death.
True, he has not the dread of future judgment, nor any
vivid, strong, practical impression of his responsibility to
fill him with alarm ; but the whole scene is dark, cheer-
less, and dreary. He is never to see the sun again, nor
the light, nor the green earth, nor his friends; he closes.
64 SACRIFICES.

his eyes in anguish, and dies without hope ; yet lest he
should fall into utter extinction, he has prepared a tomb
before he dies, that may serve as a memorial that he had
been, and that thus he may continue to survive, at any
rate, in the memory of his family and society.

The sacrifices which the Malagasy offer have no re-
ference to guilt. They are not accompanied by any con-
fessions of sin, nor are they employed as means of
obtaining pardon. They are usually votive offerings, or
the fulfilment of vows. They are presented to obtain
blessings, such as health, safety, property, offspring, or
success in trade; or they are presented on a return from
a journey, or as an acknowledgment of a vow made to
offer them in the event of recovery from sickness. There
are two kinds of offerings, one called a “‘ Sorona,” and
the other a “Faditra;” the former is always related to
good, and the latter to evil; the former is for obtaining
favours, and the latter for averting suffering. The sacri-
fices are usually animal; blood is shed, but not sprinkled ;
a piece of fat is burnt at the door of the tomb, or in front
of the holy stone, (Vato masina,) where the offering is
made. The rest of the animal (sheep or fowl) is eaten
by the party making the sacrifice. Great importance is
attached by the Malagasy to the religious ceremonies of
the circumcision, though the rite itself has no religious
idea attached to it in the native mind.

The moral character of the Malagasy, taken as a
whole, is, perhaps, not inferior to that of any nation not
having the light and influence of Divine Revelation.
They are not a people naturally savage and inhuman.
The existing practices which have been already described,
MORAL CHARACTER. 65

and which seem at variance with this assertion, have
‘been generated by the importance attached to some fell
superstitions among them, and still more by the demo-
ralizing and brutalizing influence of the wars in which
they have recently engaged. They have become dreadfully
familiar with blood, and shed it with less scruple than
they ever did. Falsehood, chicanery, avarice, and deceit
extensively prevail. The common vices of sensuality,
excepting intoxication, are also extremely prevalent; but
various crimes not always reprobated among some of
the refined nations of antiquity are utterly unknown in
Madagascar, or are followed with immediate death on
discovery. They possess also not a few redeeming
qualities. Parents generally are devotedly fond of their
offspring, and children are respectful to their parents to
old age. There is- much genuine hospitality in the
country, and warm and steady friendships exist. They
are a people prepared for improvement, and whose rapid
advancement, under favourable circumstances, would
amply repay the anxieties, toil and sacrifices that might
be expended in their service.
66 MADAGASCAR THOUGHT OF.

CHAPTER IV.

Outline of the Operations of the London Missionary Society in
Madagascar, from their commencement in 1818, to their sus-
pension in 1835.

A MEMORIAL in favour of an attempt to commence a
Christian Mission in Madagascar was presented at one of
the earliest meetings of the ‘‘ Fathers and Founders” of
the London Missionary Society, and it is believed was
read and considered at the same meeting as that in which
the scheme was adopted for making the South Sea
Islands the scene of the society’s first operations. The
late eminent Dr. Vanderkemp, of South Africa, was ex-
tremely desirous of attempting a mission in Madagascar,
and hoped to commence it on the western side of the
island. He died, however, before his plans could be
carried into execution. The late Rev. J. Campbell, of
Kingsland, obtained information as to the island, while
at the Cape of Good Hope in 1812-13, and which was
published in the first volume of his “‘ Travels in South
Africa.”

The late Dr. Milne, one of the society’s missionaries to
China, obtained, as justly stated in Philip’s heart-stirring
“ Memoirs” of that missionary model,* considerable infor-
mation respecting Madagascar, while at Mauritius on his
way to China, and transmitted it to the directors for their
guidance in some future measures. Had Mauritius been

* Just published, by Snow, 1 vol. 12mo.
MAURITIUS.—MISSION COMMENCED. 67

in possession of Great Britain, it is probable that much
earlier efforts would have been made in introducing a
mission into Madagascar, than those at which it actually
commenced. These remarks are intended to show that _
the importance of Madagascar as a missionary station had
never been overlooked, but there “lacked opportunity.”
When, during the late continental war, Mauritius capitu-
lated to the British arms, and was subsequently annexed
to the British crown, the desired opportunity presented
itself and was embraced. A mission was commenced
there in 1814, with a view to the formation of one in
Madagascar ; and thus war itself, one of the heaviest of
human calamities, became instrumental, as in the history of
Providence it often has done, in affording facilities for in-
troducing that religion of peace and love, which, in its
ultimate triumphs, is destined to ‘“‘ make wars to cease to
the ends of the earth.”

In the spring of the year 1818, two married mission-
aries, Messrs. Jones and Bevan, were sent out by the
society to Mauritius, from whence they proceeded to
Madagascar, and found immediately on their arrival at
Tamatave, in the course of the autumn, ample encou-
ragement to commence their exertions. Having deemed
it prudent to visit the island in the first instance by
themselves, and having obtained sufficient local infor-
mation for the guidance of their future measures, they
returned to the Mauritius for their families, and again,
early in 1819, reached the coast of Madagascar. Here
the hand of God soon arrested them on the very com-
mencement of their career. Mr. and Mrs. Bevan, Mrs.
Jones, and their children, were removed by death within
68 CARE OF HEALTH.

a very limited period, and the only ‘surviving member
of the mission, Mr. Jones, was utterly disabled by a
serious illness from prosecuting the mission, and was
obliged to re-embark for Mauritius, as the only probable
means of recruiting health. The mission was then wholly
suspended for about a year and a half.

It would seem, that there must have been some want
of prudence in attempting to reside on that part of
the coast at the season of the year when the mission fami-
lies went down in 1819, it being the rainy and most sultry
part of the year, and when the fierce diseases that prevail
in that part of the island assume their most virulent cha-
racter. Correct information respecting the season and
the climate could have been obtained, and must have been
offered, at Mauritius, and it may be reasonably supposed
would have formed subjects of inquiry during the first
visit of our zealous friends to the island. Their zeal
exceeded their prudence, and therefore ceased to be that
zeal on which the friends of missions can look with per-
fect satisfaction. No man can disregard the voice of God
in his providence, with impunity. Many missionaries,
it is to be feared, have sacrificed their health by an over-
weening conceit in its stability. They have fancied them-
selves capable of sustaining any amount of fatigue, even
where others have made the trial and failed; and then,
improvidently neglecting timely admonitions, have found
and confessed their mistake only when too late to correct
it, and have sunk lamented into a premature grave.
The early termination of the holy career of Henry Martyn
is not without its solemn warning. In all new and un-
tried ground, a medical practitioner should, if possible,
TANANARIVO.—NATIVE FEARS. 69

be attached to a mission. Many anxieties might thus be
superseded, the time of the missionary be saved from
avocations foreign to the more legitimate objects of his
office, and, beyond a doubt, many valuable lives would be
spared for honourable and extensive usefulness. Fresh
missionaries entering on a field already occupied cannot
be too strongly urged to listen, as wise men, to the cau-
tions of experience, (and it is only wise men that will profit
by the lessons of experience,) given them by their bre-
thren familiar with the duties and the dangers of the
position.

The recommencement of the mission at the latter end
of the year 1820, bythe Rev. D. Jones, was attended by
several propitious circumstances. The site of it was now
fixed at Tananarivo, the capital, in the district of Ankova,
in the interior of the island, at once the most salubrious
and populous part of the country, under the express
sanction and encouragement of the chieftain of that part
of the island, since more generally known by the some-
what ‘ambitious title of Radama, king of Madagascar ;
and where it also enjoyed the warm, steady and enlight-
ened support of the late James Hastie, Esq., British Re-
sident at the court of Radama, a gentleman whose liberal
and persevering efforts for the improvement of Madagas-
car, and on behalf of the mission there, as the great in-
strument of effecting that improvement, are above all
praise. From that period the mission continued its la-
bours during rather more than fifteen years. It had to
proceed, in its early stages, amidst many jealousies on the
part of the natives, whose intercourse with Europeans,
having been almost exciusively limited to the slave traffic,
40 TEACHING CHILDREN.

had led them to regard the measures of white men gene-
rally with suspicion, as essentially involving some selfish
and sinister policy. Many of the natives, whose profits
had arisen from the part they had taken in the horrible
traffic, opposed, as strongly as they durst, the whole pro-
ceedings of the sovereign, in forming a treaty with the
British Government for the suppression of the slave trade,
and for the part he took in encouraging the residence of
Europeans in his country, and the instructions they gave.
Not a few people expressed their fears, that the schools of
the missionaries were only nurseries to render their chil-
dren more valuable when sold afterwards into slavery,
and more acceptable, in some way, tothe European palate,
strangely fancying, and horribly believing, that their off-
spring were purchased by the merciless white’ men as
articles of food !

The principal efforts of the mission were directed, as
it would seem, by the very necessity of the case, in the first
instance, and for a considerable time almost exclusively,
to the instruction of children and the establishment of
schools, under the immediate sanction of the government.
This mode of proceeding has appeared to some minds
altogether questionable, and as being at variance with the
practice of the Apostles in their early efforts to convert
idolatrous nations to the Christian faith. But the cases
are by no means analogous, and cannot fairly be brought
into comparison with one another. It should be remem-
bered that no footing at all could be obtained in Mada-
gascar, nor in any country similarly circumstanced, for
labours of any kind, without the [permission of its native
and independent government; and then, in ‘affording that
NATIVE VIEWS.—LEARNING THE LANGUAGE. ‘1

permission, to say nothing of protection or encouragement,
it could only be granted for certain defined objects that
appeared to such governments deserving of the permis-
sion. To ask an idolatrous government to allow you to
reside among them, in order that you may teach them
another and better religion, makes neither an appeal to
their judgments nor their hearts; they cannot appreciate
the reasoning employed, nor do they give credit to the
motives by which you profess to be actuated. An unci-
vilized people require that some tangible and sensible ob-
jects be presented to them, in addition to the arguments in
favour of a superior religion. The offer to convey tothem
the knowledge of letters, to improve their agriculture, to
teach them the art of building better houses, or houses
instead of huts, to make them acquainted with various
” manufactures,—these ‘things they can more easily appre-
ciate; and hence may readily concede to the request of the
missionaries to reside among them. Besides this, few,
if any missionaries go out prepared to commence at once
the work of an evangelist among the people they design
to teach. A knowledge of the language is to be attained ;
and this, which was miraculously imparted in the apos-
tolic age, and qualified those devoted and inspired heralds
of the cross to enter forthwith on their labours, wherever
Providence guided their steps, demands laborious applica-
tion on the part of the modern missionary, and long resi-
dence among the people. Of course the latter would not
give him permission to live among them, just to learn the
language, that he might afterwards apply it in teaching
them a foreign religion. The latter, as we have already
intimated, would be to them no reason at all, and the
42 . SCHOOLS.

former a very questionable object; for why, they would
ask, should he set himself to the task of acquiring their
language, if he had not some sinister end in view? To
all this may be superadded the consideration, that mission
schools must ever be considered an invaluable and essen-
tial appendage to a mission, amongst a people having
no other means of acquiring literature. Every Protestant
missionary is desirous of placing the scriptures of eternal
truth in the hands of his charge, that the people may ex-
amine the written testimony for themselves, and, like the
Bereans, search whether the things be so. To a people
without schools, or without education, of what avail is the
Bible? Where shall a missionary then begin? his adult
hearers will not in the first instance attempt to learn, and
would with difficulty succeed, even if willing to make
the attempt.

To collect, then, a few children into a school seems
the most obvious and natural method, if not indeed the
only thing that can be done under such circumstances.
This secures to the missionary permission to reside on
the spot, assists him in acquiring a knowledge of the
language, for he is learning while he is teaching; gives
him an opportunity of observing and studying the language
of the people among whom he is to labour ; familiarizes
them to him, and obviates prejudices against the stranger,
and secures a reading population by the time he has pre-
pared for them the sacred volume.

This line of policy, however, requires to be guarded
against excess, the common danger of human nature. The
missionary must not suffer himself to be the mere school-
master. His early aim must be to raise up teachers qua-
TEACHING ADULTS. 43

lified to relieve him of these labours, to enlarge the sphere
of similar operations, and so leave him at leisure to pro-
secute the higher work of his vocation in proclaiming, by
the living voice, the glad tidings of reconciliation.

The Madagascar Mission has perhaps not much to re-
proach itself with in these respects, though, could the
events which have subsequently transpired have been
foreseen, a larger amount of attention would undoubtedly
have been bestowed on the adult population, even at the
cost of neglecting the children in the schools.

These remarks, which imply the comparative supe-
riority and usefulness of direct labours among an adult
population when they can be made, to those among chil-
dren only, are perhaps sustained by the two following facts
as they have occurred in the history of the Madagascar
Mission. One is, that the majority of natives converted
to a profession of the gospel, so as to afford credible
evidence of genuine faith and repentance, consists of
adulis not trained up in the mission schools, but im-
pressed by the preaching of the gospel, or by conversa-
tion with those who through grace had believed. And
the other fact is, that most of those who embraced the
truth, voluntarily and immediately commenced learning
to read, however much engaged in secular business, or
however much advanced in life.

These facts are not only encouraging to the missionary,
as demonstrating the power, and illustrating the tendency
of the Gospel, but they serve to qualify the comparative
importance of schools, and urge the “ teacher of babes”
to address himself as early, and as much as practicable,
to the adult heathen around, who, as soon as they can

E
94 RECAPITULATION.—AENCDOTE.

estimate the value of the truth he unfolds, will diligently
labour to acquire the art of reading the holy velume for
themselves.*

In the commencement of a mission among a people
without a written language, as was the case with the
natives of Madagascar, a missionary must occupy a very
large portion of his time in work strictly preliminary
to his great object. He has few aids to facilitate his
acquisition of the language beyond his oral communica-
tions with the people, and though these are found the
best means for obtaining a correct pronunciation, and
ultimately an idiomatical mode of expression, it is ob-
viously a work of immense labour, and of which those
who follow him, and reap the aid it affords them, can
scarcely appreciate the value. Other men have laboured,
and these enter into their labours.

It is not expedient to relate here the progress of the
mission in Madagascar in detail. The general results
“will be sufficient for the purpose in view.

During the fifteen years already mentioned, the whole
of the scriptures of the Old and New Testaments were

* With how much avidity and perseverance this has been done
in some of the West India Missions may be collected from an
affecting anecdote related by the Rev. J. Scott, of Demerara,
lately in England. An old man, residing at a considerable dis-
tance, extremely desirous of being able to read, came to him re-
gularly fora lesson. He made little progress. His teacher was
almost disheartened, and intimated his fears that his labours
would be lost. ‘‘ Had you not,” said Mr. Scott, “better give it
over?” “No, Massa,” said he, with great energy, “me never
give it over till me die ;” and pointing with his finger to John
iii. 16. “God so loved the world,” added, with touching em-
phasis, “it is worth all de Jabour to be able to read dat one single
verse,’?
RECAPITULATION OF LABOURS. 45

translated, corrected, and printed in the native language,
at the capital, aided by very liberal grants from the
British and Foreign Bible Society ; not fewer than 25,000
tracts, aided by the prompt and generous encouragement
afforded by the Religious Tract Society, were printed,
Russell’s Catechism was translated, and an edition of
1000 copies generously given by Mr. Cameron, amember
of the mission. Nearly all these publications were put
into circulation. The number of schools increased till
they amounted to nearly 100, containing nominally about
4000 scholars, to whom were imparted the elements
of instruction and of religious truth. Probably some
10,000 to 15,000 altogether passed through the mission
schools during the period under review. Elementary
books were provided for the use of these, and probably
ag many more were distributed among those who volun-
tarily acquired the art of reading without attendance on
the mission schools.

Two printing presses were established at the capital by
the London Missionary Society. A dictionary of the lan-
guage was prepared and printed in two volumes, the first
embracing the English and Malagasy, and the other the
Malagasy and English. Two large congregations were
formed at the capital ; nearly 200 persons, on a profes-
sion of their faith, applied for admission to church fellow-
ship; and numerous week-day evening services were
established at the dwelling houses of the natives. Adult
Bible classes were formed for the regular perusal and
examination of portions of the sacred scriptures. Various
preaching stations were visited every sabbath in several
towns and villages at which schools existed, more or less

E2
16 LETTER.

distant from the capital. Many of the principal scholars
had their attention for a long time directed tothe English
language, and became familiar with the English scrip-
tures. Innumerable opportunities were embraced of con-
versing with the natives; with many of them habits of
intimacy and friendship were formed, and as the result
of these and many other subsidiary means, the minds of
multitudes, it may be affirmed, became in some degree
enlightened in the truths of Christianity, and so far af-
fected by what they knew, as to renounce many of the
superstitious customs of the country.

It may afford a just and comprehensive view of the
state of the mission at this period of its prosperity, and
indeed as it continued up to the time of its suspension, to
introduce a copy of a letter drawn up by the writers of
the present volume, while on the spot, and forwarded to
the directors of the Society in London. It is dated Tana-
narivo, November 6, 1834 :-—

“ We have been exceedingly gratified with the personal con-
duct of many. There is a seriousness and steadiness, and per-
severance and diligence about them, which constrain us to hope
that their hearts have been opened by Him, by whose sovereign
grace,

‘ Dry bones are raised and clothed afresh,
And hearts of stone are turned to flesh.’

‘We look on with wonder and surprise, and are often
prompted to exclaim, ‘ This is the finger of God.’ The difficulty
still remains, as intimated in our last report, of ascertaining the
numbers under religious impressions. But we have reason to
think that several are savingly converted to God; that many
more are perfectly convinced of the folly of idolatry and divina-
tion ; and that great numbers are awakened to think and inquire.
The force of error is subdued, and the power of truth ac-
knowledged. The preached word is listened to attentively, and
the Scriptures are earnestly sought, and diligently examined.
MISSIONARY LETTER. q1

There are also several prayer meetings held in the town during
the week evenings. The two principal circumstances which we
wish to notice in connexion with these meetings are, first, that
a spirit of prayer actually exists and increases among the natives ;
and second, that these meetings are convened and conducted by
natives themselves. They frequently request our attendance,
to give an exhortation, and lead the service ; but the houses are
. their residences, and they consider themselves as acting on their
own convictions—at the movement of their own minds, and from
a consideration of present obligation to employ the means in their
power of spreading around their respective neighbourhoods the
knowledge of the true God, and of eternal life. It is not, how-
ever, exclusively in connexion with these stations that fall im-
mediately under our own personal observation, that a spirit of
hearing and inquiry is awakened; God appears to manifest his
purposes of mercy to this people, in raising up an agency of his
own from among themselves, to carry on his own work. He is
forming for himself his own instruments—giving them zeal and
knowledge, imbuing them with love to the truth, and compassion
for their countrymen, and thus supplying the exigencies of his
cause by their unexpected instrumentality, and so compensating
for our lack of service. And as a specific illustration of this
point, we may remark, that in a district to the west of the capital,
at a village about sixty miles distant, a small chapel has been
lately erected by the zeal and devotedness of the natives, chiefly
excited, however, by the exertions of a pious woman, of whom we
have already written to you. <A very delightful spirit of inquiry
is awakened in that district, and several of the adult natives, men
of rank and importance in their station, conduct prayer meetings,
and engage themselves in those exercises with much apparent
fervour, pleasure, and propriety. Another chapel is also being
erected in a district to the south, perhaps 120 miles distant.
Public worship, chiefly for prayer and reading the Scriptures, is
held in many distant parts of the country, principally raised and
conducted by those who were formerly scholars or teachers in the
missionary schools, Applications from all these for books, and
especially for the Scriptures, are very numerous.

In forming an estimate, however, of the moral forces
employed in producing that change in the habits and
manners of the people, which ultimately awakened the
18 MISSIONARY ARTISANS.

jealousy of the native government, and led to the adop-
tion of severe measures for the suppression of Christi-
anity, it would be exceedingly unfair and partial not to
introduce those instructions and labours of a secular
character, with which the mission was associated during
nearly the whole period of its existence.

Radama, on acceding to the terms of a treaty for the
suppression of the slave traffic in his country, and grant-
ing to the agents of the Missionary Society access to his
dominions, stipulated that his people should’ be taught
various branches of the arts and sciences. Several arti-
sans were therefore appointed to Madagascar, who re~
mained there a length of time, and some of them till the
pericd when the mission was dissolved by the violent
measures of the queen, in 1835. The instructions im-
parted by the missionary artisans to the natives, even when
not strictly of a religious character, could not but effect a
powerful movement in the native mind. Habits of thought,
attention, industry, and application, were formed, new
ideas were communicated, and new associations were ge-
nerated; a spirit of inquiry was fostered; intelligence
was conveyed from one to another, and all the materials
of improvement and civilization were placed in requisi-
tion. The Government assumed to itself the control of
the labours of the artisans, a measure obviously attended
with both advantages and disadvantages. Many intelli-
gent youths were placed under the tuition of the artisans,
amounting probably to not less than from 1000 to 2000
altogether, including smiths, carpenters, builders, tan-
ners, curriers, saddlers, boot and shoemakers, spinnera,
weavers, soap-makers, &c. &c. They were thus brought
MISSIONARIES’ WIVES.~-MARRIED MISSIONARIES. 79

under the influence, example, encouragement, and instruc-
tion of men who had entered into that department of
missionary labour, not from the prospect of pecuniary
reward, but from an ardent and self-denying desire to aid
the cause of missions, and especially in that branch of it
connected with the advancement of civilization by the in-
troduction of the useful arts. Besides these direct labours,
a large amount of indirect good was effected by the more
strictly religious exertions of these missionary artisans,
who, a8 pious men, esteemed it at once their privilege and
duty to impart, wherever opportunity could be found, the
knowledge of the great truths of that religion, without
which the highest attainments in the arts and sciences of
civilized life would be comparatively of little value.

Inspecifying the agents employed in producing a favour-
able change in the moral and intellectual habits of the
natives of Madagascar, during the fifteen years’ existence
of the mission, the invaluable labours of the female
members of the mission must be allowed to hold an im-
portant place. To them very many of the females of
Madagascar are deeply indebted, not merely for useful
instruction in various branches of needle-work, &c., a8
adapted to their social condition, but much more for con-
versation and example, for direct religious instruction, and
all the untold benevolent efforts by which devoted Chris-
tian. females would seek to win their own sex to a parti-
cipation of the pure and exalted blessings of the gospel of
Jesus Christ. .

Whatever Protestant missions may be supposed to lose,
in the portion of time and care bestowed by married men
on domestic duties, as compared with Catholic mission-
80 CHOICE OF A WIFE.—CHANGES.

aries, freed from the burden, the former are amply in-
demnified by the direct amount of good effected, in
many instances, by the wives and families of their mission-
aries, to say nothing of their preservation from those evils,
which have so often been associated with the unnatural
condition“of those who “ forbid to marry,” and insist on
the celibacy of their clergy, as though a step in violation
of the order of Providence, and the design of the Creator,
could ever be in harmony with the genius of Christianity.

Candour, however, requires the confession, though
certainly not intended to apply to Madagascar, that per-
haps sufficient care has not been always taken by mission-
aries, or their friends, in the selection of those intended
to be their companions in labour and in tribulation. They
ought not only to be pious and well informed, and imbued
with the missionary spirit, but to possess a faculty for
acquiring languages, and a tact for usefulness. Almost
as much care should be taken in ascertaining these points
in a missionary’s wife, or a candidate for that honour, as
in a missionary himeelf. All her future usefalness de-
pends on these things, and with that is identified her own
and her husband’s happiness. It may be difficult for
committees or directors to interfere in so delicate an
affair, since the parties are usually too far committed to
one another before any interference could take place; but
the utmost caution should be urged on missionary candi-
dates, being still single men, and before they venture on
steps, from which, of course, when once taken, they dare
not withdraw.

But to return from this digression. It is manifest that
numerous causes were operating to produce an extensive
CHANGES IN THE COUNTRY. 81

change in the minds, manners, habits, and institutions of
the people. In that change the members of the Mada-
gascar government did not sympathise. So far from
regarding it with a friendly eye, it was received from the
beginning with jealousy and fear. They could not tell
whereunto it might grow. The change itself became
obvious to the most superficial observer. The fact of a
change taking place created no surprise in the minds of
the members of the mission, though its rapidity and
extent did, considering the paucity of the means at their
command. They saw, however, in this, a demonstration
of the efficiency of those means when allowed fair play,
—neither forced into unnatural exertion by visionary or
despotic measures, nor impeded by brute force, such as
that which was soon employed by the government to
counteract the new order of things. The revolution
taking place in the religious sentiments and moral habits
of so many of the people, under the influence of a mere
handful of European teachers, alarmed the rulers, who
neither afiticipated such a result, nor possessed the re-
quisife mental or moral capacity to manage it; and so,
fearing its progress, they determined to crush it. The
meaning of the queen’s laws, edicts, and messages on the
subject is simply this, “‘I am determined that the ancient
and established customs and habits of the country shall
remain unaltered. Arts and manufactures, if under the
exclusive surveillance of my own government, and strictly
limited to my advantage, I shall not object to. The
inculcation of obedience to the laws I approve of. But
to relinquish divination and idolatry is an offence which
I will punish with death. The arts of civilized life may
E3
82 ENERGIES AWAKENED.

come to my country, but the people are not to cultivate
them for themselves. I will direct who shall be taught ;
wone else are permitted to learn; and the abilities which
they then acquire are to be wholly employed in the ser-
vice of the government.”

On this narrow and mistaken policy there is too much
reason to fear that Radama himself acted, though less
ostensibly and avowedly than the present queen. All his
measures were but too really subservient to his own per-
sonal aggrandizement and splendour ; and in accomplish-~
ing this object, though on a very limited scale, he deluded
both himself and his people. Selfishness, however,
cannot easily accomplish all its schemes. Providence
has wisely ordained that our boldest efforts to aggrandise
ourselves at the expense of others, shall set various
agencies in motion that shall modify or counteract our
selfish schemes. Lawless ambition may seem to prosper
for a time, but its very prosperity is creating antagonist
powers in some quarter that will check its career, and
introduce a better order of things. Thus God makes
the wrath and the folly of men to praise him, and re-
strains the remainder. In Madagascar, the ambition of
Radama and the selfishness of Ranavalona, have already
introduced measures and created energies, that must
ultimately assist in promoting the civilization and well-
being of the country. Mind has been awakened, and is
struggling to be free. Knowledge has been introduced,
and cannot be wholly again excluded. Light has been
kindled, and cannot be extinguished. The seed of divine
truth has been scattered, and it cannot utterly perish.

Various causes had been silently at work in the country
CAUSES OF CHANGES. 83

for many years, and were in operation at the period of
the suppression of Christianity there, which had aided
indirectly im producing those changes in the state of
society already adverted to. Many of these still continue
to operate, and cannot be arrested by any measures
the queen may adopt. Among these causes may be ~
noticed, first, the enlargement of the territories belonging
to the tribes under Radama’s immediate government.
Fo maintain this extension of newly acquired country
various military posts have been formed in different parts
of the island; new scenes have been visited ; new ener-
gies created; a new kind of life instituted ; new ranks
and orders in society established ; and in a word, a new
physical aspect given to the condition of society.

Secondly. Rude and unwieldy masses have been brought
under European discipline. A standing army of twenty
or thirty thousand men have been instructed in Eu-
ropean military tactics, with an active and enterprising
body of young officers, encouraged to associate with
Europeans, so as to acquire all the varied information
they could impart.

Thirdly. An extensive intercourse has been held with
foreigners, in different parts of the island, many of whom
had resided sufficiently long among them to have become
acquainted with their language, and therefore able to
communicate intelligence to the native mind.

Fourthly. The residence at the capital of missionaries
and their families, and of a British agent, during several
years, and the frequent visits of merchants, traders,
visitors, &c. could not exist without exercising much
indirect influence on the state of society.
84 CAUSES OF CHANGES.

Fifthly. The direct and indirect labours of the mission-
aries as already specified, amidst schools, preaching,
printing, and circulating books, constant conversation,
visiting, travelling about from village to village, admi-
nistering medicine, (though on a limited scale,) and the
introduction of numerous useful arts by the missionary
artisans, all helped to produce the result under review.
And to these causes may be added the fact of natives visit-
ing England for education, and then returning to their
own country; of several youths being apprenticed to dif-
ferent trades in Mauritius, and of others spending a few
years on board British men of war, most of whom are
now residing in Madagascar and diffusing intelligence
among their countrymen.

And these various circumstances, it must also be re-
membered, were acting not upon a dull and sluggish,
but on an enterprising, ambitious, and partially civilized
people, prepared therefore to take advantage of such a
fortunate concurrence of affairs, and to advance rapidly
in the career of socialimprovement. Their natural habits
of inquisitiveness and social intercourse, not to say
loquacity and impertinent curiosity, were also favourable
to the rapid developement of the elements of social im-
provement, when once imbibed. In such a state, each
one is anxious to exhibit his superiority, and therefore
communicates his newly acquired and often imperfectly
formed ideas to others; mind is thus exercised, invention
is put to the stretch, and knowledge is augmented and
extended. It is a deeply interesting crisis in the ad-
vancement of society, when men begin to become con-
scious of the superiority and dignity which knowledge
CAUSES OF CHANGES. 85

bestows, and learn to look back on their own former state
of credulity and ignorance with wonder and regret. Often
with ardour and ingenuousness are the questions then
reiterated, as if with men just awakening from long
slumber, ‘“ Where shall wisdom be found? where is the
place of understanding? where are the materials for
thinking? all this is new to us, put us in the way to
become wise.” Such were the questions literally put
again and again to the missionaries in Madagascar.

It may be just added that Imerina, the principal
sphere of the operations of the mission, presented, from
the state of its population, a highly favourable field for
its exertions ; its population is dense as compared with
many other parts of the island, though small as com-
pared with its capabilities. Of its number of inhabitants
some idea may be gathered from the fact that its largest
kabarys or public assemblies may contain about eighty
or a hundred thousand persons collected from those re-
siding within a distance of about two or three days’
journey from the capital. This presented a large body
of people, therefore, of easy access, and all stationary,
residing in towns and villages, mostly within a few miles
of the capital, while the capital itself might contain
about twenty thousand of the number.

Various circumstances of encouragement and discou-
ragement occurred in the history of the mission, which it
has not been deemed necessary to specify. The brief
sketch now presented is sufficient to prove that its labours
were not without success ; and, were it even possible to en-
tertain the fear that no future harvest would spring from
the past culture of the soil, that which has been already
86 RESULTS.

reaped is more than sufficient to indemnify the cost. The
Scriptures are in the language of the island—the standard
of the cross has been unfurled—souls have been converted,
idolatry and superstition have received a wound, and there
are not a few of the natives that believe in Jesus, and
who, amidst much tribulation, are holding fast their in-
tegrity, and are pressing into the kingdom of God.
QUEEN’S ATTACHMENT TO IDOLATRY. 87

1

CHAPTER V.

Unfavourable cixcumstances affecting the progress and prospects
of the Mission, and indicating the spirit and intentions of the
native government, prior to the Edict for the suppression of
Christianity in February, 1835.

Tax queen of Madagascar, although possessed of a mas-
caline determination of mind, amounting often to an
inflexible obstinacy, has never given any indication of
superior intelligence. She is slightly acquainted with
the elements of reading and writing, but never availed
herself, even during Radama’s life-time, of any means
to become familiar with the instructions conveyed by
the European teachers among the people. She was
always known to be deeply attached to the superstitious
customs of the country, and to have cherished a great
veneration for the national idols, and their worship.
Though rather intimate with the missionaries who first
resided at the capital, and in the habit of visiting them
and their families, she evinced no disposition to embrace
the religion they taught. Her accession to the throne
was carefully exhibited to the people as the act of the
guardian idols. They, it was said, had placed her on the
throne of her ancestors ; and of course, being taught this
doctrine herself by interested parties, she came under obli-
gations to sustain the authority of the idols, to patronize
their worship, and to encourage those who were regarded
88 JEALOUSY OF PARTIES.

as the interpreters of the wishes of these divinities. For
the service rendered to her, the idol party naturally ex-
pected her countenance and support in return. One of
the hereditary guardians of the principal idol Rakelima-
laza, at the time of her accession, was Rainiharo, and he
was appointed, ostensibly by command of the idol, to
remain with the new sovereign, while his prepossessing
manners seem to have won for him a large share of her
good graces. Two parties were thus soon formed at the
court, consisting of Rainiharo and his friends, who were
evidently anxious to maintain the system of idolatry, and
Andriamihiaja and his friends, who sought to extend
education, and to carry out and enlarge the measures
commenced by Radama. The jealous opposition of
these parties lasted about two years, when the idolatrous
or anti-liberal party prevailed. They proceeded at first
with much caution and reserve, only giving signs of their
determination to oppose Christianity just in proportion
to the gradual increase of their power and influence in
the country. The fate of Andriamihiaja has been
already described.

Tt would be difficult to point out any one single act of
the Christians which operated as the immediate cause of
the fierce persecution which has been raised against
them ; but the queen and her principal officers, it was soon
found, were evidently unfavourable to this new religion,
and therefore to the means of its extension in the country.
The character of the native mind, as indeed of the human
mind at large, was opposed to the purity of the doctrines
and precepts of Christianity; while the national pride
was mortified, and an extreme jealousy of foreigners
JEALOUSY OF FOREIGNERS. 89

awakened, on finding mere strangers changing the esta-
blished customs and usages of the country. Asa despotic
government, the authorities of Madagascar have always
been opposed to any bond of union subsisting among the
people: and the idolatrous party then in power took ad-
‘vantage of the friendship which subsisted between the
native Christians and the missionaries, to prejudice the
mind of the queen against Christianity, by representing
its teachers as having some political designs ; and hence,
even the mildness of disposition, which they exhibited
towards those placed under their instruction, and espe-
cially their liberality in supplying them with books,
medicines, &c. gratuitously, were appealed to by their
opponents, as proofs that they must have some sinister
end in view. .

One of the first direct indications of opposition to the
mission, and its objects, consisted in the order abruptly
sent to the Rev. D. Griffiths to leave the country, on the
alleged ground of the expiration of the period allowed
him by Radama for remaining in Madagascar.*

The government desired him to leave immediately,
and promised him a letter of commendation to the English
government asa testimonial of the valuable services he
had rendered to the country. On his requesting permis-

* Radama’s jealousy of foreigners, and some practical diffi-
culties which he had met with, in regard to their claim of exemp-
tion from the native laws, ordeals, &c., led him to fix a period
beyond which no foreigners should remain in the country without
becoming his subjects, though under certain exceptions in their
favour. The same circumstances led him to forbid foreigners
acquiring any permanent right in the soil.
90 PROHIBITIONS.

sion to remain, five months were allowed him to prepare
his packages, and subsequently, though with much diffi-
culty, he obtained permission to remain a year longer ;
and afterwards, by dint of persevering effort, to remain
for an indefinite period, with the understanding that he
was to leave whenever the queen desired it. Soon after
this, the Rev. T. Atkinson received explicit orders to leave,
though he had not yet been a year in Madagascar; and
then one of the artisans, Mr. Canham, whose term had
about expired.

In the latter end of the year 1831, the permission
which had been granted about six months previously for
the administration of baptism and the Lord’s supper was
recalled. Those connected with the army were the first
prohibited from receiving either ordinance, and in a few
weeks, public instructions were sent to the missionaries
not to administer them to any of the natives, and to the
latter, not on any account to receive them.

In the latter end of the next year, the slaves were
strictly prohibited from learning to read and write. The
prohibition, it is thought, arose not merely from a
determination to keep the slave population, if possible,
in their inferior state, but from the fact, that many free
people were in the habit of purchasing slave children, to
place them in the schools instead of their own. Certain
towns and villages were required by law to provide a
given number of children for the schools, as a part of
their service due to government ; and the parents, to avoid
placing their children where they might so soon be drawn
off to the army and perish, were attempting to evade the
NEW SECT. 91

law, by placing slave children in the schools, which
would have enabled them to return the numbers required,
without risking the welfare of their own families.

A deeply interesting event occurred in the autumn. of
the year 1834, which, it is believed, had considerable
influence in rousing: the jealousy of the government, and
creating in some of its myrmidons a restless desire to get
the property of all the Christians confiscated, with the
hope of obtaining a share of it. The circumstance at-
tracted much attention, both among Europeans and natives,
and may be related as follows :—

Rainitsiandavaka was a man in the middle age of life,
and the keeper of, an idol belonging to the government,
called Izanaharitsimandry, meaning “ the god not taking
rest.”” He was extremely industrious in his usual agri-
cultural occupations, had acquired some property, and was
living in comfort. In the year 1832, he had‘experienced
a succession of calamities; his wife died, in afew months
afterwards his child died, and soon after that several of
his slaves ran away, and others died. These things
preyed on his mind, and he became somewhat melan-
choly. In the following year he went a few miles from
home, to unite with some members of his family, on an
occasion of public rejoicing in the village where they re-
sided. That occasion had brought also to the village
Raintsiheva, an eminent native Christian, who had
adopted the name of Paul. The party were to remain in
the village through the night. Paul, disliking to be near
the house where the music and dancing were to be kept
up, went to lodge at the other extremity of the village.
Rainitsiandavaka intimated his wish to accompany him,
92 ZEAL WITHOUT KNOWLEDGE.

_ and it was agreed they should pass their time together.
Paul, in accordance with his usual custom, introduced
the subject of religion, and they conversed on religious
subjects through the night. The conversation produced
a deep impression on Rainitsiandavaka, and next day,
when the former was returning to the capital, the latter
followed him, remained with him several days, and then,
for the first time, attended the preaching of the gospel at
one of the mission chapels. He and Paul called on one
of the missionaries, and entered into conversation with
him. The new visitor appeared full of his subject, and
returned home on the morrow. Without seeking further
knowledge from his teachers, he began to talk to the
people in his village and neighbourhood, of the day of
judgment, of the resurrection of the dead, and of the
happy time when all men would be so far influenced by
the religion of the Bible, as to live in peace with one
another. His friends and neighbours laughed at him,
and concluded he was deranged. He left his work, and
went about among his friends and neighbours, conversing
on these new themes. He was not able to make any
impression on their minds for some months, but still
persevered. He again visited Paul at the capital, who
very properly urged him strongly to learn to read the
scriptures, and to seek more knowledge, before he at-
tempted to ‘teach others. He did not seem pleased with
the advice; urged that, if he could not read, the people,
who were also ignorant of the art of reading, would
more easily be induced to believe what he said. “ Let
the youths in the schools, and’ the Europeans,” said he,
* teach those who can read, and let us who cannot read,
ACTIVITY. . 93

teach the people that cannot.’ Paul reminded him of
the great danger of his teaching what was not taught in
the word of God, unless he learnt to read it for himself.
He replied that God was teaching him what to tell the
people, independently of what was revealed in the Bible;
that God revealed his will to him by dreams, and told him
by inward suggestions, what to say, and had commanded
him to deliver the message to the people, under threats of
heavy judgment if he neglected it. Paul again urged
that God had revealed in his word all he intended to
make known; that by reading and searching the scrip-
tures we might become acquainted with the will of God,
but that if we neglected the means which God had ap-
pointed for our! instruction, we could not expect to know
the things which belonged to our eternal peace. His
friend warned him also of the danger of being led into
serious errors by some strange delusion. Finding he
could not prevail on him to seek increased knowledge of
the plan of salvation, he left him, and did not freely asso-
ciate with him afterwards. Rainitsiandavaka returned
home, and spent his time and property in going about
conversing with the people. He travelled from village
to village, and visited from house to house, conversing
with every one he met with, young or old, rich or poor.
The points of his conversation were principally the day
of judgment, the resurrection of the dead, the time when
universal peace would be established on earth, the origin
of mankind, and the descent of all from Adam and Eve.
He taught that we should do to others as we would they
should do to us. His moral conduct was upright, and
unblameable. Some of his slaves went to him one day
94 FATAL COMPROMISE.

and said, You say we should do to others as we would
have others do to us; we are sure, if you were our slave,
you would wish us to set you free; we are your slaves,
and we wish you to set us free. He said that was per-
fectly just, and he would do so; only as they had not been
long in his service, it would be fair for them to pay him
a part of their redemption price, when able to doso ; this
was agreed on, and they were all set free. In the course
of about two years not less than 200 persons had joined
him.

For some months, however, he had now blended with
the worship of God that of the idol Izanaharitsimandry,
though maintaining that the idol was nothing more than
a Kiady.* This wretched attempt to amalgamate the
worship of God and that of the idol, he probably made
under the hope of conciliating the queen and her govern-
ment, who, being so devotedly attached to idolatry, might,
he thought, be more disposed to listen to the message he
had to convey, if they found the idols were not wholly
discarded. By that means he expected to augment the
number of his converts among the people.

Thus it seems that a sect embracing serious and fatal
errors was springing up, even in this comparatively
early stage of the mission, bearing considerable analogy,
in spirit and principle, to some of the early sects that cor-
rupted and divided the Christian church. The danger
of these departures from the simplicity of the gospel has

* ¢.¢.,a means of keeping off intruders, and intimating that
the place is sacred, or that something sacred is being performed
there. It is often placed against houses and villages where there
are sick persons, or where the tangena is being administered.
VISIT TO THE CAPITAL. 95

its “roots so deeply laid in human nature, that every
Christian missionary needs to exercise the utmost vigi-
Jance over his converts, and especially over his ‘native
assistants of a sanguine temperament, lest his fairest
labours should be marred, and error, insidiously creeping
in, under false and plausible disguises, lay truth prostrate
in the dust.

Rainitsiandavaka always maintained that, though he had
received his revelation by some immediate communica-
tion from heaven, yet that Ads instructions and those of
the European teachers were substantially the same.

In the autumn of 1834, he sent to the queen to inti-
mate that he had an important message to convey to her.
He had attempted this some months previously, but she
had refused to attend to it. The message was now de-
livered to Rainiharo, the principal officer, and he was
told at the same time, that the followers of Rainitsian-
davaka had become very numerous. This aroused the
jealousy of the government, and the whole party was
summoned to the capital, to state what they had to say.
They were delighted to hear this, and thought the queen
herself would now become one of them. They took with
them the idol Izanaharitsimandry. The queen sent
messengers to meet them on the road, to say that if the
message they had come to deliver were not true, they
should return home at once, and abanden the notions
they had entertained ; but if true, to come forward and
to deliver it. They affirmed it was true, and accordingly
continued their journey, amounting to nearly 200 per-
sons. The judges and officers went tothem in the course
of the evening and asked them their message. They
96 ONE BLOOD.—CRUEL DEATH.

said, they had a message from Andriamanitra Andriana-
nahary, (the nearest expression in the language for the
supreme God ;) that the queen Ranavalona would be
sovereign of all the world ; that the dead would rise, and
the living never die; that all‘would then live peaceably
and happily, for there would be an end put to the ordeal
of tangena, the sikidy or divination, murder, wars and ~
contentions. ‘‘ We offer,”’ said they, “‘to forfeit our heads
if what we say is false ; God has told us these things, and
God cannot lie.” The conversations and examinations
continued for two or three days. Many questions were
put to them by the judges and officers. One inquiry
craftily put was this: ‘ You say that all mankind have
descended from the same parents, do you mean to affirm
that we and the Mozambiques* (forbid that we should
ever pollute the name of the queen, by mentioning it at
the same moment with the Mozambiques!) are from the
same parents?’ The party unhesitatingly replied that
the queen and all the human race descended from
the same parents. This affront to the vanity of the
Hovas gave great offence, and helped to seal the doom of
Rainitsiandavaka and his followers. :
Most of the 200 remained firm to their cause to the
very last; some, however, withdrew, when they saw the
affair becoming serious, and likely to affect life and pro-
perty; but even these were not allowed to return home.
About midnight, after the conversations referred to,
the queen sent to put Rainitsiandavaka and three of his
principal followers to death: a piece of cloth was tied

* Whom the Malagasy hold in great contempt, though glad to
employ them as slaves,
THE SECT CRUSHED. 97

over their mouths to prevent their speaking, from an
apprehension that, as they continued so firm and steadfast
in their doctrines, they might utter some expressions inju-
rious to the government, and threaten some calamity on
the kingdom for shedding innocent blood, which might
alarm the people. They were then led to the north end
of the town, and cruelly destroyed by being placed, head
downward, in a rice pit, boiling water being poured on
them. The earth was then thrown in upon them, and
the pit} filled up. Their bodies remain there to this
time. Many of the people went the next day to the spot
tosee, whether, according to the doctrine of the resurrec-
tion they had taught, any of them would rise from the
dead.

Seventy of the party were compelled to take the tan-
gena, and eighteen of that number died and were dragged
along the road like pieces of timber, so that the very
stones were stained with their blood, and the stains con-
tinued visible for several weeks till the heavy rains ulti-
mately washed them off. Some of those who were tried
by the ordeal, and perished, had refused to drink the
warm water which forms part of the process, saying that
they would rather die than live, since the government had
treated their friends in the manner they had done.

All the rest were sold into slavery, and their property
confiscated. The affair yielded a profit of several thou-
sand dollars to the queen, officers and judges, and in-
creased the desire to obtain more. .

The sect was thus entirely crushed, but the transaction
tended to bring Christianity and its followers under
greater suspicion.
98 EARLY CONVERTS,

It would be easy to recapitulate numerous events
that occurred about this time, all tending to pro-
duce the measures so soon afterwards adopted by the
queen’s government, in order to suppress “Christianity.
It may be sufficient to insert here a few only of these,
as illustrating the state of feeling and the habits of the
country.

Erroneous impressions were created in the minds of
some of the officers and the senior people, by the some-
what indiscreet zeal and injudicious addresses, occasion-
ally made by the too partially informed converts. Some
who were merely convinced of the folly of idolatry, and
scarcely competent to expound the first elements of
Christianity, took upon themselves to become teachers of
others. It is natural under such circumstances that there
should be distorted and exaggerated representations,
creating unnecessary offence and unjust prejudice. All
such cases require the utmost prudence on the part of the
missionaries ; to repress early zeal, is repugnant to the
temper of that very religion which inspires it, and would
deprive the mission of its most valuable resource in na-
tive agency; but to employ the latter without great care,
examination of character and persevering instruction, is to
foster pride in the native mind, to disgust the more intel-
ligent portion of the community, and to endanger the
success of the mission itself.

Statements advanced by native converts in their ad-
dresses were often misunderstood, and misrepresented, by
their hearers, and this aggravated the evil that was work-
ing. In the beginning of 1835, a native was addressing
a small congregation at the capital, and was overheard to
ANDRIANTSOA.—INCORRECT REPRESENTATION. 99

say, that ere long God would punish all the workers of
iniquity, and reward who had loved and served him.
The expressions were reported to another, who, disliking
the doctrine of future punishment, went and told one of
the principal officers, by whom it was related to the
queen. She desired spies might be sent next time to
bring a fuller report. The next discourse was on the
resurrection. ‘All must rise,” said he, “God alone will
be Judge. Every one in this country will be raised and
judged then.” It was reported to the queen that the
preacher had said, the inhabitants of her country alone
would be judged by God in that day. “It is false,”
said the queen; “ other sovereigns are allowed to judge
their people as they please, and am I alone to be pro-
hibited? If so, God is indeed partial. Besides, how
should they know that God will raise the dead? Who-
ever pretends to know that, can see the moon even be-
fore cattle can (implying sorcery). I myself have never
lmown such things as these,” said the queen, “ and if
they were true, I must have known them.”

About this time offence was also created ,by another
circumstance not intended to produce any such results.

A young man named Andriantsoa, was residing at the
capital, whither he had removed from his native village,
where he still possessed a piece of rice ground. He had
long attended the preaching of the Gospel, and gave evi-
dence of his having become a true disciple. He evinced
a great desire to introduce the Gospel to his native village,
and obtained a house for that purpose. In the same
village was a renowned idol, called Ratsisimba (Incor-
tuptible). The keepers were indignant with the young

: F2
100 NO WORK ON 8ATURDAY.

man for having spoken disrespectfully of their idol, and
had many warm disputes with him on the subject of
idolatry. Saturday* was sacred to this idol. Andri-
antsoa wishing to be at the village on a Sabbath, to con-
duct service there, went on the Saturday morning, with
the intention of planting his rice ground. On reaching
it, and commencing work, the villagers desired him to
desist; it being their sacred day. He did not hear
them, and so continued working. A person was then
sent down from the village, with express orders to him to
desist. He replied that as he was not one of the worship-
pers of the idol, nor even living’ among those who were,
he thought that he was at liberty to work on Saturday,
if he wished it, as well as on any other day; but at their
desire would cease, and he desisted accordingly. He
was prohibited from returning to the village by the
direct path, and compelled to take a circuitous road, so
as not to tread on any rice ground ; it being one of the
“ fady,” or sacred observances of the idol, “not to tread
on any rice ground on a Saturday.” On reaching his
house in the village he felt vexed at the treatment which
he had received, and spoke in not very courteous terms
of the idol to a friend. ‘I am surprised,” said he, “ at
the stupidity of these people placing their confidence in
amere piece of wood, which were I to smear with anything,
however offensive, could do me no harm.” A female
slave overheard it, and told it to some of the people, who
were incensed at the expression, and determined to have
him punished for his temerity. They consulted for

* Some one day in the week is usually kept sacred to every
principal idol in Madagascar.
ACCUSATION. lol

some weeks, and at length met with Razakandrianaina,
originally from the same village. On appealing to the
idol, as to what should be done with the young man, it
directed that he should be killed and cut in pieces,
otherwise the rice harvest that year would perish. Ahab
like, the officer readily entered into the scheme to get rid
of the young man, as he was anxious to obtain possession
of a piece of land, which the latter was unwilling to part
with, but which he hoped to secure, if the property of its
present owner were confiscated. This officer had, more-
over, no less than six wives; three of whom were own
sisters; and as the young man lived near his house
he prevailed on one of them to learn to read and
to attend the preaching of the Gospel, which gave great
offence, and for which the wife was immediately di-
vorced. Razakandrianaina willingly carried the accusa-
tions of the villagers against Andriantsoa to the judges ;
stating that he was changing the religious customs of
the country; that he paid no regard to the idol, nor
observed its fady; that he conducted himself differ-
ently to other people ; would not swear, nor follow the
licentious habits of the people; that he would not work
on the Sabbath, nor mention the name of the idol in his
prayers, although he prayed four or five times a day ; and
that he was collecting the people to pray after dark ; and
in a word that, owing to the disrespect he had shown to the
idol, it had become incensed against the people, and was
destroying their rice with hailstones. The chief judge
listened gravely to the accusation, and replied, he did not
see much to condemn in the young man ; for there was no
direct proof that he had intentionally violated the prohi-
102 TANGENA.

bitions of the idol, or that he had collected the people
under any evil design, of exciting to rebellion ; and that
as to praying, it was a good thing in itself, and it might
be well if all prayed rather more than they did. “ How-
ever,” said he, “ as you desire me I shall convey the mes-
sage to the queen.” The message was accordingly sent
to Her Majesty, and the case represented in the most un-
favourable light : it was added that the idol had declared,
unless the young man who had given the offence were
put to death, the rice harvest should be destroyed by
insects. It was fully expected the young man would
have fallen a victim. ‘The queen, however, did not think
proper to accede to their wishes, but directed the ordeal
of tangena to be administered, to ascertain whether the
party accused possessed any sorcery. The ordeal was
given him at a moment’s notice. The missionaries and
the native converts were anxious as to the results, and
most of them contributed something on the occasion,
either in money or service. To the great mortification of
his accusers, he was in a very short time pronounced in-
nocent of the charge. Soon afterwards, having retired
for a few days toa private village, in accordance with the
usual customs of the country, he came up to town in a
public procession, which was much more numerous than
on ordinary occasions. The native Christians were so
overjoyed at the result, that a large number of them,
perhaps somewhat imprudently under the existing state
of excitement, joined in the procession, dressed in their
white lambas, or robes. The queen and some of her
officers happened to see the procession from a distance,
and looked on with astonishment. She inquired what
QUEEN’S SURPRISE. 103

crowd it was in sight, wearing white lambas. They
told her it was the procession of Andriantsoa, coming up
to town ; and that those who were wearing white dresses
were native Christians. ‘ You would be surprised,”’ they
added, “‘at the love of those people one for another ; when
any one of them happens to be in distress they all feel
distress, and when any one is happy, they are all happy ;
when any are poor and destitute they form a society* to
assist them.”? ‘I am indeed surprised,” said the queen,
“ to see such things in my country. Was it not I that
ordered him to take the ordeal, and why do they now
make such an exhibition, as if they had overcome an
enemy? All this is intended for me, I suppose.”

These circumstances it would appear created so much
prejudice in her mind, as to prepare her to entertain any
further charges that might be brought against the
Christians.

Razakandrianaina, the officer who had taken the ac-
cusation to the judges in the first instance, was also look-
ing at the procession from his own house, and felt greatly
mortified to see so much respect paid to the young man ;
and having heard, in the course of the evening, that the
procession had displeased the queen, he formed his reso-
lution to bring an accusation against the whole body of

- the Christians; and was the more encouraged in this, by
ascertaining that the queen and her favourite officers
had entertained an utter antipathy to everything about

* Meaning, they collect money of one another to afford relief,
and to aid in defraying the expenses of funerals, &c. This seems
to have been the meaning which the Government always at-
tached to the word sociefy, and which has given rise to so much
jealous and mistaken apprehension.
104 JEHOVAH OR IDOLS.

Christianity. He knew that Ratsimanisa had sent some
persons to listen to the preaching of the natives, and that
what had been reported had given offence. He himself
went one evening to listen. A Christian slave happened
to be addressing the congregation from Joshua xxiv. 14,
15, ‘‘ Now, therefore, fear the Lord, and serve him in
sincerity and in truth; and put away the gods which
your fathers served on the other side of the flood, and
in Egypt; and serve ye the Lord. And if it seem evil
unto you to serve the Lord, choose ye this day whom
you will serve; whether the gods which your fathers
served that were on the other side of the flood, or the
gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell; but as for
me and my house, we will serve the Lord.” The
preacher urged his hearers to leave off idolatry and for-
sake the gods which their fathers had served, and to
serve Jehovah and Jesus Christ.

The officer returned home, and thought he had now
obtained sufficient materials on which to form his accu-
sation. ‘* Jehovah,” said he, whether ignorantly or
intentionally is scarcely known—“ Jehovah was the first
king of the English; Jesus Christ the second; and
the Andriamanitra (gods) whom their ancestors had
served on the other side of the flood, means the queen
and her predecessors.” Hence the slave was represented
as raising assemblies in the night, making kabarys
(speeches) to the people, that no one replied to, and all this
to urge the people of Madagascar to serve the English,
and renounce their allegiance to the queen.

He then went to the judge who had taken his former
accusation against Andriantsoa to the queen, but pro-
GRAVE ACCUSATIONS AGAINST THE CHRISTIANS. 105

duced little effect on him. He next proceeded to the chief
officer and told him all his grievances, and, to give his
narrative a dramatic effect, wept abundantly, (for neither
crocodiles nor crocodiles’ tears are unknown in Mada-
gascar); ‘* Destroy me at once,” said he, ‘“ unless you
will carry my message to the queen; I would rather
perish than see the kingdom transferred to the hands of
foreigners ; for that I foresee will be the end of it, if this
Christianity is to be allowed.”

The officer advised him to carry his accusation to Ratsi-
manisa the next evening. He went, taking with him
six other persons, including some of the keepers of the
idol Rakelimalaza, and Raolombelona (a native youth,
educated in England, and baptized at Manchester).
“You,” said Razakandrianaina, addressing Ratsimanisa,
‘* you are the representative of the queen: if permission
may be granted to speak, without loss of liberty or life,
we will tell the queen something that may be of service
to the kingdom; if the queen approves of it, she can.
accept it; if not, let it be rejected; but let not those.
who declare it be in danger.” Ratsimanisa conveyed the-
message to the queen, and immediately returned with
her answer, encouraging him and his party to speak
freely whatever they had to tell, assuring them she was
willing to adopt their suggestions if she approved of them.
‘© There are, then,”’ said the accuser, “in and around
the capital certain people changing the customs of the
twelve sovereigns of Andrianimpoinimerina, of Lehidama,
and that of Ranavalomanjaka. They despise the idols of
the queen and the Sikidy, (or divination,) and all the
customs of their forefathers ; they treat them as nothing,

F 3
106 QUEEN’S TEARS.

and consider themselves as under no obligation to honour
and worship them, though these alone obtained the king-
dom for the queen and her ancestors. They enter into
a league with the English that are residing here; they
despise the graves of the Vazimba, though they, perhaps,
contain the ashes of the ancestors of the queen. They
also hold assemblies in the night* rather than in the day,
and deliver speeches, (¢. e., they preach) in these meetings
that no one replies to, and they do these things without
permission from the queen. Moreover in these meetings
they urge all present to serve Jehovah and Jesus Christ.
Our ancestors never heard of these persons, nor have we
till now ; nor do we know even now who they are. It is
said, that Jehovah was the first king of the English, and
that Jesus Christ was the second. Besides all this, these
meetings are carried on by slaves. We cannot see the
end of these things: the queen only knows; and she
knows what is best to be done; but we fear that these
people, who have become so friendly with the English,
will attempt to transfer the kingdom of the queen to
them.” All this was well calculated to work on the
fears of the jealous, ignorant, and superstitious ; and it
produced its effects. Ratsimanisa afforded the accusers
all the encouragement he could, and promised to be one
with them in the accusation, and that he would lay it
thoroughly before the queen. Next day it was laid
before her 5 and, having listened to the whole account, she

* This, though often charged against them, was utterly false.
The meetings were held in the evening, when the people had
finished their work, and usually closed by eight, or at latest by
nine o’clock.
QUEEN’S TAUNTS AND THREATS. 107

burst into tears and cried a long time. She then swore,
in the name of Andrianimpoina, that she would put a
stop to these things, and that with the shedding of blood.
Soon afterwards, the judges received orders to summon
all the people, even toa child of a cubit high, to a kabary,
to be held at the capital, on Sunday, the 1st of March ;
and during the interval many reports as to the probable
results got into circulation, and many fears were enter-
tained of violent measures being resorted to.

On the previous Sunday the queen had ordered that all
the “ mpanjaitra,” which signifies “ sewing women,”*
and who had formerly belonged to the mission schools,
should assemble within the court-yard, te sew. She
knew that most of them were in the habit of observing
that day by attending on public worship. Passing them
in the court-yard, she looked at them, and said with a
very contemptuous sneer, hardly befitting royalty, ‘“‘ You
had better go and ask permission of the Europeans to
allow you to come and sew for me on the Alahady, (or
Sabbath!) You observe the day like the English; I do
not; you had then better go and ask their permission.”
On the evening of the same day, she was returning home
from the amusement of bull-shooting, and on passing Mr.
Griffith’s chapel, overheard the singing, and observed to
those with her, ‘ These people will not leave off until
some of their heads are taken from their shoulders.”

The chapel at Amibatonakanga was crowded on that
Sabbath. One of the old judges had a daughter in the
habit of attending, and he had warned her in the morning

* The female members of the mission had taught many native
girls and young women the use of the needle.
108 RAININGITABE,

not to attend any place of worship that day; after he had
gone out, she however went to Ambatonakanga, and on
his return, not finding her in the house, he proceeded at
once to the chapel, and looked in at every door and
window for his daughter, but did not find her. He re-
turned and expressed much surprise at finding so large
a congregation, but remarked to some of his attendants,
“ You will never see such a congregation assembling for
worship in that place again; for the queen does not ap-
prove of it.” This circumstance greatly increased the
suspicions of the Christians, as they knew the old judge
was likely to be acquainted with the mind of the queen
on the subject. —

Preparations were now made through the week for the
great kabary. On Tuesday a private order was given to
write down a list of the houses where social prayer-
meetings had been held, and the names of all the persons
baptized. These were given in to the queen next day,
and the five chief officers were ordered to meet in the
court-yard. One of them was unwell, and four only met.
The names of the baptized, and the list of the houses
- where prayer-meetings had been held, were read to the
queen. She was astonished at their number, and swore,
in the name of Andrianimpoina, that she would put to
death the owners of the houses. She appeared now ex-
tremely violent againstthe Christians. There were several
officers about her, but no one dared to speak. At length
Rainingitabé rose ; and, having made a long apology for
presuming to speak, added that from the earliest times
servants had had the privilege-of telling their thoughts
to their masters. ‘But should you, to whom I belong,”
APOLOGY FOR CHRISTIANS BY A PAGAN. 109 —

said he, “‘ think fit to cut me off and destroy me, I still
cannot refrain from saying freely what are my thoughts
on this subject. Far be it from us to defend even our
wives or children, our fathers or mothers, our brothers
or sisters, our relations or friends, from being punished
according to your will, when guilty of transgressing the
law. Weshould most willingly deliver them up that the
law may take its course, and especially those who con-
spire against the sovereign. Take confidence, Madam ;
we are here, and ready to put to death all who seek to
do evil in your country and would overturn your govern-
ment. Still I would entreat you to consider well what
you propose to do with these people, who have learned
the taratasy* and to pray. There are some of them
daily about me, and I have had an opportunity for years
past of observing their dispositions and their conduct ;
and I can assure you I have not seen any, whether among
the soldiers or among the bourgeois, more upright,
diligent, faithful, and trustworthy than those who have
learnt the taratasy and attended the prayer-meetings. If
I tell them to go anywhere on business, whether by day
or night, they go; whatever I desire them to do, they do
it, and scarcely ever have I cause to be angry with any
of them. Besides this they certainly possess more in-
telligence and knowledge than most others in the country.
Your predecessors, Madam, put a great value on wise,
faithful, and intelligent subjects. (Here he mentioned
the names of several intelligent persons in the time of
Andrianimpoina and Radama, who died, and whose death

* A general term for paper, books, instruction from books,
reading, &c. :
110 EFFECT OF THE APOLOGY.

had caused such grief to those sovereigns, that they had
said they would rather have lost ten thousand of their
subjects, than such wise men.) Should you put to death
any of these intelligent young people, who have been for
years receiving instruction from the Europeans, I fear,
Madam, you will be the loser, and be sorry for it. When
once they are killed, you cannot purchase back their
lives with money. These are my thoughts, Madam, and
I cannot but tell them, whatever may be the consequence.”’
After he had resumed his seat, a long silence ensued.
At last the queen said, “ I thank you for your advice: I
have indeed a father and a mother in you: you donot con-
ceal from me what you think will be of service to the king-
dom. We shall consider well what to do with them.”
Andrianisa then rose up, and after the usual apologies,
said he very highly approved of the advice just given, and
added that almost all the new things that had been lately
introduced into the country for the good of the kingdom,
had been introduced by the English; such as European
discipline in the army, the manufactures of gunpowder,*
soap-making, leather-making, improvements in the work
of carpenters, blacksmiths, &c. &c., and that if any of the
natives who had been placed under the instructions of
the Europeans should be put to death for adopting their
customs, their teachers would be deeply grieved, and it
would become an occasion of reproach to the queen’s
country.

* This was not quite correct. The art of making powder had
been long known in Madagascar. Improvements were intro-
duced by Verkey, a native of the country sent to England by
Radama, and placed by the British Government at the Powder
Mills, Waltham Abbey, for that purpose.
EDICT TO THE EUROPEANS. 111

The other officers present, whatever might be their real
sentiments, seemed to approve of what had been said,
and indeed could scarcely do otherwise, at the time, as
the queen herself appeared inclined to listen to the sug-
gestions.

The queen had also summoned some of the head
people from the other districts to attend at the capital,
especially those from Avaradrano; among these were
Ramantavary and Rainilehimanga. These were not al-
lowed to enter the court-yard; but were informed on
their arrival that the queen was desirous of having their
opinion as to the putting te death one or two of the most
active among the Christians in each district. They had
no hesitation in expressing their disapproval of such a
measure.

As so many persons of influence had now spoken in
favour of the Christians, the queen it appears was some-
what shaken in her determination of putting some of
them to death. On the Thursday morning a letter to
the Europeans, forbidding their teaching Christianity, was
drawn up, and they were summoned to receive a message
from the queen, at four o’clock that afternoon. A few
hours before the letter was sent, other officers were sum-
moned to the court-yard to hear it read ; and though there
were many among them that could not approve of it, no
one ventured to reply against it; they saw the measure
was fully decided on.

At four o’clock that afternoon the usual public service
was held at the chapel at Ambatonakanga, and one of
the natives was requested to conduct the meeting, and ta
deliver an addrese. The chapel was quite full, and the
112 EDICT.

address was excellent, founded on the very appropriate
text, ‘Save, Lord, we perish.” It was the last public
address ever delivered there. The officers then came to
the residence of Mr. Griffiths, where the Europeans had
met by appointment, to receive the queen’s message.
Ratsimanisa, the most inveterate enemy to Christianity,
was at their head. His appearance indicated great ex-
citement and determined enmity, as if actuated by some
malignant power. There being no room for the whole
party in the house, they entered the chapel ; and after the
usual forms of salutation, Ratsimanisa said, there was a
letter from the queen to the Europeans, adding, “most of
you understand the Malagasy language; if there are any
here who do not, the others can translate it for them.”
The following letter was then read :—

“To ALL THE EuvROrEANS, ENGLISH AND FRENCH.

Antananarivo, 26th February, 1835.

“ T INFoRM you, my friends and relations, with regard to the
disposition you have manifested towards my country, in teaching
the good disposition and knowledge, I thank you for that; it is
highly acceptable to me, for I have observed the disposition
manifested by you to Radama, and also to me, that you have not
changed.

* And I also inform all you Europeans, that whilst you reside
here in my country, you may, among yourselves, observe all the
customs, (religious observances,) of your ancestors, and your own
customs; and do not entertain any fears, for I do not change the
customs of your ancestors, or your customs, for the disposition
that you have manifested to my country is good : however, though
I state that, if the law of my country be violated, the party is
guilty, whoever he may be ; nor is that done in this country only,
but throughout the world, wherever the law of the country is
violated, the party is guilty.

‘ And further, I tell you explicitly, that if these people of mine
should change the customs of the ancestors, and that which has
been transmitted from the ancient line of my predecessors, and
‘ANSWER TO THE EDICT. 113

from Andrianimpoinimerina and Radama, if they should change
that, I utterly detest it, (laviko izany,) for that which has been
established by my ancestors, I cannot permit to be changed: I
am neither ashamed nor afraid to maintain the customs of my
ancestors ; but if there be good disposition and knowledge that
may be beneficial to my country, that I assent to, but still the
customs of my ancestors FE. cannot allow to be relinquished.

“And hence, then, with regard to religious worship, whether .
on the Sunday or not, and the practice of baptism, and the
existence of a society, (or societies,) those things cannot be done
by my subjects, in my country; but with regard to yourselves, as
Europeans, do that which accords with the customs of your
ancestors and your own customs. But if there be knowledge of
the arts and sciences, that will be beneficial to my subjects in
the country, teach that, for it is good; therefore I tell you of
this, my friends and relations, that you may hear of it.

“ Saith Ranavalomanjaka.”’

After receiving the message of the queen contained in
her letter, the Europeans retired from the chapel to
their houses, followed by many of the native Christians
overwhelmed with grief and terror.

To the letter from the queen the following reply was

sent two days afterwards :—
“ Antananarivo, 28th February, 1835.
* To Ranavalomanjaka :

* May you attain to old age, not suffering affliction. Madam,
may you equal in length of days the human race. We have
received your letter, brought to us by the officers of the palace,
and we are happy to find that the disposition we have manifested
in your country, and in teaching the good disposition and wisdom,
has been acceptable to you.

‘ Nevertheless, we are exceedingly grieved respecting your
word, which says, religious worship is not to be performed by
your subjects. For we know and are assured, that the word of
God is beneficial to men, and the means of making them wise,
whoever they may be, and that it renders illustrious and pros-
perous those kingdoms which obey it. And this teaching of
ours, the word of God, together with teaching the good dispo-
sition, and the arts and sciences, are the purposes for which we
left our native country.
114 REPLY TO THE ANSWER.

“We, therefore, most humbly and earnestly entreat of your
Majesty not to suppress our teaching the word of God, but that
we may still have the means of teaching it together with the use-
ful arts and sciences.

* And with regard to your word, saying that we are not
allowed to purchase land; we have heard the message, and
submit to it; and we will not purchase land—for you, Madam,
are the Sovereign of the Country.

‘s May you attain to old age; and we pray to God to bless
you. May you live long, and may your kingdom prosper, say
we Europeans.

(Signed) “ Jonns, FREEMAN,
Cuick, CAMERON,
Kitcuine, BAKER.”

In reply to the letter from the missionaries the queen
rejoined as follows :—

‘6 Tananarino, 2d March, 1835.
“To Mesers. Johns, Freeman, Chick, Cameron, Kitching, Baker ¢

‘HEALTH to you. Ihave heard the message in your letter,
and I say to you, ‘Did I not expressly tell you, that with regard
to the customs of your ancestors, they are not changed, that is,
among yourselves, not even while you are here in my country 4

«¢And while you are here in my country, if the customs of
your ancestors were changed, should you not be grieved ?

* ¢And I tell you what I have already told you, that my people
are not to do these things, for that which was done by my
ancestors cannot be changed.’

*¢ Such is the message of the sovereign, which she has directed
to be sent as an answer to the message in your letter.

“ Say Rainrmanaro, } 11th honour, Officers of
RainIsEHENO, the Palace.”

The language of this letter is sufficiently evasive, for the
missionaries had not hinted at any change being made in
their religious customs, nor did they attempt to force any
changes on the people. But it was manifestly useless to
press any explanations on the attention of the government»
as their decision was now deliberately taken, and authori-
tatively announced.
EXCITEMENT. 115

As yet no restriction was placed on the distribution of
religious books, and the hope was entertained that at
least those which had been already distributed would
be allowed to remain in the possession of those who
had received them, and for the same reason they
were still given to those who applied for them during
the two days’ interval between the letter of the queen
and the kabary to the people; and as all the scholars
had came up to town to hear the kabary, there were
most extensive applications for books and tracts. From
that time most of the Christians withdrew, and hardly
ventured to visit the missionaries, as it was found that
Rajery, one of the most inveterate enemies among the
judges, had sent some of his Dekana or aides-de-camp
to watch near their houses, so as to see what, natives
came to them. It is probable that many were at this
time employed as spies, and it seems that the Christians,
being aware of it, were on their guard.

It was now a time of great excitement among all
parties, friends’ and foes, at the capital, and it was felt
that the lapse of a few days would involve a most import-
ant crisis in the history of the mission, and the moral
state of Madagascar. The friends of the idolatrous party
were on the alert, the entire civil power of the govern-
ment was being arrayed in its defence, and the little
flock of Christians were on the eve of becoming “like
lambs in the midst of wolves.” The members of the
mission knew that the cause of Christ must ultimately
triumph, but rejoiced even in this with trembling, knowing
how fearful might be the struggle ere victory for truth
was won.
116 KABARY ASSEMBLED

CHAPTER VI.

Detailed account of the proceedings directly connected with the
suppression of Christianity in Madagascar.

Havine in the last chapter explained some of the causes
and circumstances which led to the adoption of a series of
vigorous measures for the suppression of Christianity in
the island, it may be useful and instructive to notice in
this chapter the measures themselves, as illustrative of
the spirit and character of the government, and of the
trials to which the native Christians were exposed.

On Sunday, the 15th of February, all the “ Heads of
hundreds” were ordered to assemble in the spacious parade
ground at Tananarivo.* The judges met them there, and
conveyed the queen’s command, that they should forthwith
summon all that were able to walk, men, women, chil-
dren, and slaves, to uttend a “‘kabary,” to be held that
day fortnight, the Ist of March. None were to re-
main at home in Imerina, excepting one individual in
each house, to take charge of the property. The soldiers
were ordered to assemble on the 24th of February, inva-
lids as well as those in health. On their arrival, the
troops of each district had a spot assigned them for en-
campment; their names were called over, and their
numbers strictly examined. On the 26th and 2%th,

* It is called Imahamasina, and is situated on the western side

of the hill, and is so extensive, that from 100,000 to 200,000 per-
sons might be conveniently assembled there.
AT IMAHAMASINA. 117

the bourgeois from the distant villages began to assemble,
and a large party of Vahiny, or strangers from the
western coast of the country, who had come to take the
oath of allegiance to the queen, and be received under her
protection. On Saturday, orders were issued that all the
different encampments of the troops should approach
nearer to the spot where the great kabary was to be held,
and that the strangers should hold themselves in readi-
ness to attend the kabary on the following day. Strict
orders were also issued that all the people should assemble
at Imahamasina, on the parade ground, early in the
morning ; that all the soldiers not having military clothing
should assemble there at day-break, to form a line on each
side of the road along which the strangers were to enter the
ground. These lines extended nearly a mile. The soldiers
who had military clothing were arranged on the parade.
The judges proceeded in the morning to inquire of the
strangers if they were prepared to take the oath of allegi-
ance: and that business being terminated, the judges en-
tered the parade, where they were met by the officers of the
palace accompanied by a regiment of troops and the
queen’s band. The strangers arrived on the spot at the
same time. The cannons were now kept firing along the
brow of the hill that overlooks the parade, and the mus-
ketry of the lines of troops along which the strangers passed
kept up an incessant fire at the same moment; all in-
tended to awaken alarm in the minds of the multitude,
and to show the stern determination of the queen to carry
her point by all the power she could command.

The vast concourse of troops and people being now
118 MUSKETS AND POWDER.

assembled and arranged, the officers who had commanded
an expedition to the west, came forward, and, with the
usual formalities, gave an account of their proceedings
and success. The strangers who had accompanied them
tothe capital declared their fidelity, and presented the usual
tokens of subjection. Again the drums beat, the music
played, the cannon and musketry fired, the people shouted,
a semi-barbarous dance was performed by a certain class
of the troops, and graver affairs then commenced.

The principal judge addressed the people in the name
of the queen, to the effect that the kingdom of Ranavalona
was a kingdom continually advancing; that in the time
of Andrianimpoina and of Radama, they had purchased
muskets at a very high price, paying for them as much as
thirty Spanish dollars each ; that gunpowder also had been
extremely dear, but now, says the queen, these articles are
made in my country, and you shall see to what perfection
they are brought. Several of the newly manufactured
muskets were then fired off, (happily, without bursting,)
produced a tremendous noise, and greatly delighted the
people who cared at all about the matter.

One of the principal native gunsmiths, and one of
the superintendents of the powder-mill, then made an
oration in praise of their own ability, and assured the
queen, through her officers, that they would faithfully
retain and improve the knowledge of these arts, which
they had received from the Europeans.

The principal judge again commanded the attention of
the assembly to the message they were now to hear, and
for which they had been summoned, and_all, whether
ROYAL MESSAGE. 119

soldiers, scholars in the schools, or bourgeois, were to
repeat the message in every direction, so as to make it
universally known.

The Royal message was as follows :-—

«« I announce to you, O ye Ambaniandro, I am not a sovereign
that deceives, nor are the servants deceived. I, therefore, an-
nounce to you what I purpose to do, and how I shall govern you.
Who then is that man, a servant too, that would change the
customs of our ancestors, and of the twelve sovereigns in this
country? To whom has the kingdom been left by inheritance, by
Andrianimpoinimerina and Radama, but to me? If then any
would change the customs of our ancestors, and of the twelve
sovereigns, I abhor that, saith Rabodo-nandrian-impoin-imerina.

“Now, on the subject of reviling the idols, treating the divina-
tion as a trifle, and throwing down the tombs of the Vazimba,
I abhor that, saith Ranavalomanjaka. Do it not in my country.
The idols (say you) are nothing. By them it is that the twelve
sovereigns have been established; and now are they changed,
and become nothing? The divination also, you treat in the same
manner; and the tombs of the Vazimba, too, though indeed, they
are their ownevidence. Even the sovereign counts them sacred ;
and are the people to esteem them as nothing? This is my affair,
saith Ranavalomanjaka, and I hold him guilty, whoever in my
country destroys them (the tombs).

** As to baptism, societies, places of worship, distinct from the
schools, and the observance of the sabbath,—how many rulers are
there in this land? Is it not I alone that rule? These things are
not to be done, they are unlawful in my country, saith Ranava-
lomanjaka ; for they are not the customs of our ancestors, and I
do not change their customs, excepting as to things alone which
improve my country.

‘¢ Now then, as to those who have observed baptism, entered
into society, and formed separate houses for prayer, (or worship, )
I grant you one month, saith Ranavalomanjaka, to confess (to
make self-accusation), and if you come not within that period,
but wait to be first found out, and accused by others, I denounce
death against such; for I am not a sovereign that deceives, and
servants are not to be deceived. Mark then the time, it is one
month from yonder sun of this day, that I give you to confess.
The scholars at Ambodinandohalo, and those at Ambatona-
120 ROYAL MESSAGE.

kanga, and not those only, for there are scholars in all these
twelve principal towns, and the scholars that have not opened
separate houses, but at the appointed schools alone have wor-
shipped and learned, these are not condemned, and they are not
to confess ; but those who have opened other houses, these are
to accuse themselves.

‘¢ And those who have been baptized, whether they have wor-
shipped in other houses or not, these must also accuse themselves,
and those also who have entered into society.

« And you, the bourgeois and soldiers, that have been attend -
ing the schools for worship, and especially such as have opened
other houses for worship, and been baptized, and entered into
society, and kept the sabbath—Come, and accuse yourselves on
these accounts, for I, the sovereign, do not deceive; but if any
come first, and accuse you, I denounce death against you; and I
do not deceive, saith Ranavalomanjaka.

s* And I moreover announce this to you, saith Ranavaloman-
jaka, here are your slaves, that you have been teaching to write,
and who have gone to the separate houses of prayer, and others
who have gone to the schools also, and especially that have been
baptized ; all these must also come and accuse themselves.

“T announce to you, scholars, my command; so long as you
are scholars, and remain under the instruction of the Europeans
in their houses, observe the sabbath; nevertheless, it is as to
writing only, in which you are to observe it, but not in anything
else whatever ; and further, from the moment that you go out of
their houses, even on the sabbath, you are not to use or observe
it, for I, the sovereign, do not observe it at all; and it shall not
be done in my country, saith Ranavalomanjaka.

« And again, as to your mode of swearing, the answer you are
giving, is ‘ True,’ and when you are asked, Do youswear it? you
reply ‘True.’ I wonder at this! What, indeed, is that word
‘True?

*¢ And then, in your worship, yours is not the custom of our
ancestors ; you change that, and you are saying, ‘ Believe,’ ‘Follow
the customs;’ and again you say, ‘Submit to him,’ ‘ Fear him,’ ‘Re-
member him,’ and thus, you change the customs of the ancestors,
for you do not invoke all that is sacred in heaven and earth, and
all that is sacred in the twelve sovereigns, and all that is sacred in
the sacred idols. And is not this changing the customs of the
ancestors? I detest that, and I tell you plainly, that such things
shall not be done in my country, saith Ranavalomanjaka.”
ADULATION AND SERVILITY. 121

Perhaps the officers in the Queen’s confidence thought
that the fudge who had just delivered this message had
not given it all the weight and emphasis he might, in his
manner of announcing it. Ratsimanisa, therefore, re-
peated the substance of it with all the eloquence and force
he could command. In accordance with the usual
custom, some of the head men of the districts then pro-
ceeded to reply or rather respond to the sovereign’s
message. The head man from Ambohimalaza took pre-
cedence in the expression of adulation and servility.

“May you,”’ said he, addressing his speech as to the Queen,
and as though she were present, ‘* May you, Madam, attain to
old age, not suffering affliction ; may you equal in length of days
the human race. And first of all it is ours to express to you our
thankfulness ; for that which you say and do, is pleasing, ac-
ceptable, and sweet to us; you are a sovereign not condemning
too hastily, but first taking time to examine matters well. But
we are astonished, Ranavalomanjaka, to hear what you say.
Who are these fellows that presume to change the customs of
our ancestors and of the twelve kings? let them be delivered up
to us, and we shall put every one of them to death, if they change
the customs of our ancestors, saying, ‘ Follow its laws,’ ‘ Be-
lieve him,’ ‘ Do not fight or be contentious,’ ‘ Fear him,’ or if they
receive baptism and form societies. Take courage, Ranavalo-
manjaka, they shall not annoy you, we are ready to destroy them.
And now you that are guilty of these things, see, the Queen has
given you one month to accuse yourselves: unless you do so
within that time, it will appear that you prefer death to life, you
will act as the moth that rushes wilfully into the fire, for you
wilfully resist the command of the Queen.”

At the close of his address two head men from Avara-
drano, viz. Ramantavary and Rainilahimanga, shrewd,
intelligent, well-disposed men, possessing considerable
influence, and one of them an intimate friend of the
Queen before her accession, addressed the assembly in

G
122 PEOPLE'S APOLOGY.

the following manner, after finishing the usual prefatory
compliments ;

“ First of all, we entreat of you, officers and judges, repre-
sentatives here of the Queen, to carry our message to the sove-
reign, and tell her what she says and does, is pleasing, acceptable,
and sweet to us, for she is, indeed, a sovereign that does not
condemn the guilty too hastily; she doesnot run to kill; she does
not hasten to shed blood; she announces beforehand what she
is about to do, and causes her people to come and accuse them-
selyes* of what they have done in her country contrary to her
will. And with regard to your present message, Ranavalomanjaka,
you say, ‘ Come and accuse yourselves, ye that have done these
things.’ Alas! Ranavalomanjaka—may you attain to old age not
suffering affliction—to whom did Andrianimpoina and Radama
leave the kingdom but to you alone? Do not blame us when we
tell you this, Ranavalomanjaka. When the Europeans came to
this country to teach wisdom and knowledge to us, and when we
first placed our children under their instructions to obtain
wisdom and knowledge so to advance the welfare of the kingdom,
Radama then told the children, ‘You are now placed in the
schools for the benefit of my kingdom; and therefore whatever
these white people teach you, learn with all your might, and do
whatever they tell you; for this purpose you are placed under
their instruction. Apply therefore to your learning most dili-
gently: whatever your mind cannot comprehend, let your hands
take hold of it, and whatever your hands cannot take hold of,
let your minds receive ; this is the design for which you have
been placed under their instructions: and whatever hardship you
may experience in learning with them, bear all patiently, for we
are people that seek wisdom and knowledge from them.’ And
now, Madam, may you attain to old age—we have learned wisdom
and knowledge from them. Ourselves, our wives, our children,
and our friends have all done so; but whatever our hands, our
minds and souls did in this respect, all was intended for the
promotion of the good of your kingdom and to render you sacred,

* Persons accusing themselves to the government of any
offence are usually treated with much greater lenity than those
who are found guilty on the accusation of others. Hence to
encourage the former is deemed an act of great clemency on the
part of the sovereign.
PROCEEDINGS OF THE KABARY. - 123

‘ mahamasina.’* And now when the time has arrived that you,
Ranavalomanjaka, do not approve of these things—May you
attain to old age, not suffering affliction, and may whatever you
do cause you to live long—we confess our guilt, and crave pardon
for doing in your country that which you do not like to be done.
We beg of you, Madam, to accept of a bullock and a dollar as a
fine for our having done what is displeasing to you, and also as
a pledge from us that nothing of the kind shall be done again.”

The people generally seemed to approve very highly
of what these two chieftains had said, and a different turn
was given to the kabary.

Rainiharo, the principal officer of the army, then ex-
pressed himself in the following terms:

‘* Respecting those you have received baptism, who have
formed ‘ society,’ who have abstained from certain common prac-
tices, who have said, ‘ Follow its laws, Do not fight,’ who have
reviled the holy idols, spoken disrespectfully of the Vazimba, kept
sacred the sabbath, &c. unless those who are guilty of these
crimes come forward by this day month to accuse themselves, we
the hundred thousand} shall destroy them; for what they have
done is not derived from their ancestors; it is not in obedience
to the order of the Queen, it is not in obedience to orders from
their commanders or the judges or any under the judges; they
have done these things of their own accord, without asking per-
mission of the sovereign and consulting their officers. Unless,
therefore, they come forward by this day month to accuse them-
selves, we are ready, Ranavalomanjéka, to cut off their heads.”

The twelve senior teachers of the schools inquired pri-
vately whether they were allowed to speak then or not.
Rainiharo replied that as they were classed among the
guilty, they were to speak in town, and not in that public

© Probably the meaning of this expression, derived from some
custom now obsolete, is simply that of confirming in the posses-
sion of the kingdom.

+ A term often used to designate the army, and implying its
vast numbers.

G2
124 THE PEOPLE ACCUSING THEMSELVES

place. It was now getting late, and the assembly was
dismissed.

On Monday, the 2d of March, as most of the people in
town and its vicinity, and also those from the distant vil-
lages, were either involved themselves in these charges or
had some of their friends involved, scarcely any of them
returned home, but waited to see whether the Queen
would accept the proposal of the two head men from
Avaradrano; namely, to receive a dollar and a bullock as
a fine, and would at once forgive, on this occasion, those
who had been guilty of these charges. It appears that
their speech had produced some effect on the mind of the
Queen ; for, early in the morning, she sent the officers of
the palace to them, desiring them to repeat what they had
said in the public assembly the day before. They were
rather alarmed at this, and the one who had delivered the
speech begged the other to go over it, that the Queen
might know they agreed in their sentiments. Being con-
fused and alarmed, he declined doing so; when his com-
panion, taking courage, repeated it, and it was again
carried to the Queen. In the afternoon the people were
summoned to assemble at Ambatonakanga, and the
officers of the palace and the judges came with an answer
from the Queen as follows: “ The sovereign is pleased at
your obedience in coming thus together at her command.
If she orders you to come in the morning, you come; if in
the evening, you come ; you are prompt in your obedience ;
you assemble whenever she commands you, whether mid-
day or midnight. And this I announce to you, saith
Ranavalomanjaka, I gave you yesterday one month to
come and accuse yourselves, but you could not wait even
TO THE GOVERNMENT. 125

one month—you could not return home at all, but stopped
in town, and hastened with the greatest speed to me to
confess your crimes and to crave my pardon. You en-
treated me to forgive you by receiving a bullock and a
dollar without further investigation into the matter ; I will
not consent to that ; but, as you appear anxious on account
of your crimes, I have decided to give you only a week to
accuse yourselves, instead of a month : all that are guilty
are to come forward by that time and accuse themselves.
Against those who do not come within that period I de-
nounce death. Take care, therefore, to send in your self-
accusation tothe proper person and ina proper way. The
soldiers are to accuse themselves to the five head officers ;
and the guilty officers also are to give in their names to
these five—the bourgeois are to give in their names to
the judges—and the scholars to those who rule over them.
Be careful in specifying all your crimes in your self-
accusation, and class yourselves who are guilty of similar
offences ; namely, those who have opened separate houses
for prayer-meetings are to be in one class—those who
have received baptism in another class—those who have
entered ‘society’ in another—those who have observed the
Sabbath in another, &c. The officers and the soldiers
must not mingle together in their self-accusation, but let
each class be separate. And remember that next Sunday
is the last day; unless you send in your names by that
time, you die wilfully.”

Some of the head men present replied, pronouncing
benedictions on the Queen for her message, and promising,
since she was not pleased to forgive without their self-
accusations, that they would do so within the time spe-
126 MESSAGE TO THE MISSIONARIES.

cified. Ramantavary, one of the two head men that had
spoken in the assembly the previous day, began again to
speak in defence of the accused, saying that Radama cer-
tainly did tell the scholars to learn all the things taught
them by the Europeans; but Rajery, the judge, imme-
diately rose up and asked him, “ Did Radama order them
to institute a ‘society ?? Did Radama tell them to be bap-
tised ?” &c. &c. The old gentleman took the hint, and
confessed that Radama did not. He might have said that
Radama was the patron of the school society, and had
given full permission to his subjects to receive baptism and
the Lord’s supper ; but he knew that, had he gone a step
further in the defence of the Christians, he would have to
suffer for it. Fear imposed silence.

The missionaries were summoned to meet that evening to
receive a message from the Queen, that they were exempted
from teaching writing on the Sabbath, (which they never
had done ;) but that the children were not to be under
their command on that day ; and that they were to teach
nothing religious in any way in the schools at any time,
nor even to impart general knowledge, as in history, &c.

In a few days after, this latter part of the order was
recalled, and permission ‘was given to teach any genera,
knowledge, provided the Queen was previously consulted
and the instruction approved by her. The restriction was
removed in consequence of Mr. Cameron being at that
time engaged in teaching some young men chemistry at
his establishment at Alakely.

This day was remarkably stormy; the wind blew
down upwards of a hundred houses at Ambohimanga.
Many of the people said, they thought God was manifest-
SENIOR TEACHERS. 127

ing his displeasure at the proceedings of the govern-
ment.

The twelve senior teachers now received the following
message from the Queen :—

* And this I demand of you, twelve senior teachers,
with regard to the baptism and the holding of assem-
blies in houses where schools have not been established
by my sanction, and the forming of societies, &c. Has
all this been done by my order, or by the order of
Radama ?”

They replied, “ May you, Madam, attain to old age,
&c. We confess our guilt and crave your pardon for
doing what is not allowed in your country. Do not blame
us, Madam, while we tell you, that when Radama placed
us in the schools to be instructed by the Europeans, he
told us, ‘ Learn diligently all the knowledge which these
foreigners communicate to you, and do whatever they tell
you.” When we heard that—may you long live, Madam
—we did indeed follow what they told us. With regard
to the houses opened for prayer-meetings, there were
prayer-meetings held in such houses in the time of
Radama ; for there was one held in Ratsimandisa’s house,
there was another at Rasoantsiriana’s house, and, some
time after, meetings were established in some other
houses, and we attended them: and occasionally they
were held at our houses in turn; yet we are not the per-
sons that commenced them, only we attended them as
other people did. But after you suppressed baptism,
Madam, we held no meetings in our houses, and, there-
fore, these numerous meetings in town, although we at-
tended them, have not been instituted by us. With
regard to the baptism, some of us indeed have been bap-
128 CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN THE

tized ; but when the baptism was suppressed by your
order, we obeyed your orders; and if any one has seen us
doing it since then, let him come forward and accuse us.
And with regard to the society, there was one indeed in
the time of Radama; but since you suppressed it, we have
not seen any attending it in your country, nor have we
received a farthing from a society since that time. May
you live long, &c. Whatever you consider proper to do
with us, whether it be an affair prolonged or curtailed,
we are mere servants, and have no choice in this matter ;
do as you please with us, Ranavalomanjaka.”’

To this message the Queen replied, “I have heard your
reply to my questions, and if you are going to answer me
in that manner, let it be 80; but, let me ask you again,
did Radama tell you to establish prayer-meetings in
houses where schools are not held? and did he tell you to
be baptized? If he did give you that order, do not con-
ceal it from me.”

In answer to which the teachers replied :-—

‘“* May you attain to old age, &c. Radama did not
order us to open other houses for prayer, besides the
school houses, nor did he order us to receive baptism.
But with regard to the society, Radama did establish it,
and gave himself fifty dollars towards it; and there are
some officers now living who can bear testimony to this
fact. But may you attain to old age, Madam—whatever
we have done with our hands, minds, and souls, all was
intended for the good of our sovereign and that of her
kingdom, and to render her sacred. And now, Madam,
since you do not approve of such things being done in
your country, we cease from doing them, for you are the
sovereign of the land.”
TEACHERS AND THE QUEEN. 129

To this the Queen again replied: ‘* Stop a little, if that
is the way you answer me; for I do not understand your
cunning words and prevarications: you are young men
that have learned well how to speak in your own defence.
I am not able to reply to your cunning words, but if you
will venture to take the tangena, come and let us see
whether what you say is true or not. If there were as-
semblies held in Radama’s time, will you not live? And
if not in his time, but you established them in my reign
for the purpose of injuring my kingdom, will you not
die?

“ And with regard to baptism and the other assemblies
established latterly by you, if you formed these things to
raise insurrection in my country, and with a view to over-
turn my kingdom, and with the intention of entering into
an alliance with foreigners to take the kingdom from me,
will you not also die ?”

To this the young men again replied in the following
manner: “ May you, Madam, attain to old age, &c. We
dare, Madam, to take the tangena. May you long live,
&c.; do with us whatever you think proper. But we
crave your pardon for all we have done contrary to your
will. We have indeed been baptized, and have held
meetings in houses where schools were not held, but we
appeal to the fangena that we have not done these things
with an intention of any evil to your country; but it be-
comes us to crave your pardon, Madam, for we dare not
presume to give a challenge to the sun.”*

* A sufficiently flattering, though not unusual appellation for
her Majesty of Madagascar, and little appropriate, as many will
think, to one who loves darkness rather than light.

63 .
130 LETTER.

The Queen sharply replied, ‘‘ How is it that there is so
much cunning prevarication continually in your replies ?
Go, fellows, and write a letter to accuse yourselves to me,
that I may see on paper what it is you have to say, and
then I shall be better able to judge whether you have
done these ‘things in my kingdom with any bad intention
or not.”

The young men now received a hint from a friend who
was well acquainted with the proceedings within the
court-yard, that if they should attempt to justify them-
selves in this letter from the charges laid against them,
they would be involved in the greatest danger, and that
their letter should contain only confession and entreaties
if they wished to save their lives.

Their timidity appears to have prevailed over their
better judgment, and though some of them, there is reason
to think, would have preferred a more honourable course,
the majority decided, and the following letter was sent in
the name of them all :—

‘* Antananarivo, 5 Adaoro, (3 March) 1835.
“To Ranavalomanjaka :

“May you attain to old age, &c. In the first place, it is our
business to express our unfeigned thanks to you. We are pleased,
we are delighted with what you have done, it is sweet to us; for
you are not arbitrary in your proceedings, you have not put us to
death without giving us an opportunity of speaking :* you have
not run to shed our blood—you have not hastened to cut off our
heads, but you came to inquire first, you came to examine tho-

* It is difficult to find any apology for all this. It can only
mean that they were thankful the Queen had not at once put
them all to death, compared with which, her measures may be
viewed as somewhat lenient; but still such expressions, from such
men, painfully indicate how much the fear of man bringeth a
snare.
QUEEN’S REPLY. 131

roughly our case, you act so as to have no cause of reflection
respecting us hereafter. We thank you, Ranavalomanjaka, for
you are a sovereign, searching thoroughly into every case, that
justice may be given to every one of your subjects. And after
thus expressing our gratitude, we come to acknowledge our
offences, we come to crave pardon for the evil we have done in
your kingdom; we are, indeed, guilty, Rabodonandrianim-
poinimerina, for we have acted unauthorizedly according to our
own inclination, we have done these things at random—we did
not ask permission of Radama, nor did we acquaint you with
what we were doing—we, therefore, confess our offences, and
crave forgiveness, for you are the proper object of supplication,
and we are the suppliants; we again crave forgiveness for the
offences we have committed—and whatever you determine to do
with us, may that cause you to attain to old age, for to whom did
Andrianimpoina and Radama leave the kingdom, but to you
alone, Ranavalomanjaka ?
“ Say the twelve teachers.”

To this humble or rather servile and humiliating letter,
the Queen replied: ‘ And this I say to you, the twelve
teachers; I have received your letter which contains your
self-accusation, and the number of the scholars guilty of
the same offences. And it is well that you did not dare
to contend with the sun, but that you come: to confess
your guilt, and earnestly crave pardon. It is well that
you have not now used cunning words, nor presumed to
justify yourselves, nor spun out your craftiness to dispute
with me, but you now candidly confess your crimes, and
entreat forgiveness. And as you have done 80, and have
given me a written document which expresses your sor-
row and repentance, it remains with me now to choose
what punishment to inflict upon you; and I will do with
you as I will do with other persons who are guilty of the
same offences, for I shall show no partiality among my
subjects.”
132 VINDICATION,

The people were employed busily during the remainder
of the week in sending in their self-accusations. This
was a time of severe trial, when many of those who had
made some profession of religion, or of regard to the or-
dinances of Christianity, said, like Peter, “ I know him
not.” Various were the excuses made by the fearful and
unbelieving, as, “‘I went from curiosity, and seeing the
evil of it, I ceased to go. I observed indeed the sab-
bath, but was never baptized. I thought it was doing
feudal service so as to confirm the Queen in her govern-
ment. I never believed, but went because others went.”’
Some, of whom the missionaries had hoped better things,
said: ‘* Since God will not protect us, we may as well
do as we please,” and then, yielding to evil propensities,
they plunged into sevenfold wickedness. But others,
“ faithful among the faithless,” boldly told the persons
who were appointed to receive their accusations: ‘“ We
did no evil, and intended none to the Queen or her king-
dom in our prayers and our observance of the sabbath ;
we prayed to the God of heaven and earth to prosper her.
reign.”” When they were asked how many times they had
been praying and worshipping God, they frankly con-
fessed that they could not tell, for whenever they were
disengaged from the government service, they had neg-
lected no opportunity of attending on the worship of God :
and as to praying, said they, we always prayed before
going to our work in the morning, and before going to
sleep in the evening ; also before and after eating, and
often at other moments in the course of the day.” One
excellent Christian, from a distant district, a man of
considerable influence, was accusing himself to the judges :
NOBLE CONFESSION. , 133

being asked how many times he had prayed, he replied,
he could not tell: “‘ but I can tell you,” said he, “that for
the last three or four years I have not spent a single day
without offering prayer several times a-day. I asked for
nothing injurious to any one, but intreated God to make
all the people in this country and in other countries, as
well as myself, good people.” The judges asked him to
give them a specimen of his prayer, which he cheerfully
did, in the presence of multitudes. He first told them
how he confessed his sins before God, and implored for-
giveness, and asked God’s help to enable him to live
without sinning ; to wash him from his sin; to make him
holy, and to prepare him for eternal happiness. He said
that he asked the same blessings for his family and
friends, and for the Queen and all her subjects; and,
said he, “TI asked all these things in the name of Jesus
Christ, for we sinners can receive nothing from God but
through his Son Jesus Christ, who died for sinners.” The
judges confessed that his prayers were very good, but as
the Queen did not approve of such things, they ought not to
be offered in her country. The conversation lasted a con-
siderable time, and some of the Christians present observed
that they did not think the judges had ever heard the gospel
preached to them so faithfully and clearly as at that time
—for this devoted Christian spoke a good deal to them
of the Saviour and how he died for the guilty. This was
the eminent and kind-hearted Christian who subsequently
risked his life, by concealing the persecuted converts
during some months, and who was then obliged to flee to
the forest himself, to avoid the rage of the persecutors.
The converts during this period of trial’ ceased not to
134 NATIVE DECISION.

offer fervent prayer for divine protection. A faithful
though small company of them agreed to meet together
for prayer at midnight, every night during this week, at
the vestry at Ambatonakanga, and many of them often
afterwards said, that they had never before experienced
so much pleasure and consolation in drawing near to God,
as at this time. In this little band was an officer of high
rank in the army, and, although he had never before
declared himself one of the Christians, he now did, and
has ever since remained a faithful follower of Christ.
He had frequently attended the preaching of the gospel,
but resolved not to accuse himself to the government.
When asked by a friend why he joined the Christians at
this perilous time, and neglected obedience to the com-
mand of the Queen in not confessing that he had attended
religious ordinances, he replied, that he perceived so
much injustice in the proceedings of the kabary that he
felt disgusted, and determined to join the injured party ;
that, after having united with them a few times in thes,
meetings, he had felt so much pleasure in their company,
that he resolved to take their God as his God, and their
people as his people ; and as to accusing himself, he had
determined not to do so until convinced that he had done
something wrong in attending these religious instructions.
Since that time his wife, also, has been brought to ac-
knowledge the Saviour. The refugees now in England are
greatly indebted to him and his wife for having concealed
them for some time in their house.

One evening during this week three or four Christian
women met together in.a friend’s house, and were con-
verging on the melancholy events occurring; it was late

ee se
LUTHER’S PSALM. 135

at night, their husbands had gone to town to accuse
themselves, and were longer absent than they expected.
Many painful conjectures crossed their minds. They
thought ;they had been, probably, imprisoned; their
hearts melted within them, and they felt unequal to sustain
these trials. ‘I have often,” said one of them, “thought
that if persecution should arise, I had no strength to bear
it, and I fear all my religion is delusive.”” The others made
the same complaint. In this dejected state of mind, a
Christian friend, from a distant district, happened to
arrive ; the women were delighted to see him, and told
him their anxieties. He asked them if they had read any
portion of the word of God that day; they said they had
not had any opportunity of reading, on account of the con- .
fusion, and the number of strangers that had entered their
houses. Have you, said he, been earnestly wrestling with
God in prayer? They said they had tried to commit their
cause to him, but they felt themselves overpowered with
fear, and had lost all power to pray with fervency. “I
wonder not then,” said he, “ you feel so much alarm and
are comfortless. You have neglected crying for strength
to Him that is mighty, and who has promised to give it
in every time of need to his people ; come,” (he added as
if animated with the very spirit of Luther, but of whom
the good man had in all probability never heard) let us
read the Forty-sixth Psalm.” He took out his Psalter,
read it, and made some appropriate remarks on it. They
then knelt down and prayed most fervently that God
would strengthen them and remove their fears. Some of
these pious women declared, months afterwards, that they
had scarcely felt any fear since then, and if they did, it
186 GROUNDLESS ALARM.

would soon cease by reading the Forty-sixth Psalm, and
drawing near to God in prayer. One of these women has
been since sold into slavery on account of her profession
of Christianity.

During the week many reports were circulated, and
apprehensions entertained that some would be put to death.
It was generally said the final kabary would be held at
Ambatoroka, an indication that life would be taken, since
no kabary is summoned to be held there except when it is
intended to inflict the penalty of death. It was also re-
ported that general permission would be given by the
Queen to treat with indignity the persons of the Christian
females. This gave more pain and grief to the Christians
of both sexes than all the other reports in circulation. -
One good man, who had remained firm and unmoved
amidst all the other reports, was overcome when he heard
this, and wept like a child.

Among the persons who accused themselves was a man
from Imamo, a district about sixty miles from the capital,
who, in coming to the kabary, and crossing the stream
at Ivatolehivy, called out to a man that stood by a canoe
on the opposite side, ‘‘ Sosay,” i. e. ‘push off ;” referring
to the canoe.. The judge who delivered the Queen’s mes-
sage, could not recollect, or exactly pronounce the foreign
word “society,” and so adopted a native word nearest in
sound to express it, namely, “‘ sosay ;”’ and ordered that all
persons who had used “ sosay,” should come and accuse
themselves, under pain of death. The poor man, being
afraid lest the person to whom he had called out to push
over the canoe should accuse him, actually came to the
judges and made a lengthened apology for having used
QUEEN’S FINAL MESSAGE. 137

the word, saying that he did not know there was any harm
in it, and that he was willing to bear any punishment
which the Queen should see fit to inflict upon him for
the offence !

On the expiration of the week, it was expected that the
message from the Queen would be immediately announced.
It was, however, put off; it being part of the policy of
the government of Madagascar to keep the people in a
state of anxious suspense, so that they may fear the worst.
If the worst happen, then it is no more than was expected ;
if less, then it proves the /eniency of the government, and
the equity and the mercy of the Sovereign !

On Monday, the 9th, the people were summoned, and
the Queen’s message was announced by the officers of the
palace and the judges :—

“‘ This I announce to you, O ye people, when you were charged
with certain offences in my country, and of changing the customs
of our ancestors, and those of the twelve sovereigns, and of An-
drianimpoina and of Radama; and when I assembled you to-
gether at Imahamasina, and at Ambatonakanga, to call you to an
account for your crimes, I allowed you one month to accuse
yourselves of what you had done in my country contrary to my
will. You could not wait even one week, for the very following
day you came to confess your offences, and to crave pardon; you
could not return to your homes without soliciting my forgiveness,
saying, ‘ Our wives are guilty, our children are guilty, our brothers
and sisters are guilty, we craye pardon for them, Ranavalomanjaka.’
And hence I announce to you, all ye people, and especially to
you who are guilty of the charges laid against you, had it not
been for the earnest supplications of all the Ambaniandro and the
numberless entreaties sent to me by them,—for who are those
that dare to attempt to change the customs of the ancestors, and
the old usages descended from the twelve sovereigns? I repeat it,
had it not been for the vast number that united in a body to
crave pardon on your behalf, I would have driven you all down
that yonder river until you would have been dashed over the
138 QUEEN’S FINAL MESSAGE.

cataract Ifarahantsana, but all Imerina united in craving pardon
for you day and night; and that is the only reason why I spare
your lives. Do not think that the number of the guilty has had
any influence on my mind to spare you—what is a thousand or
two thousand, or even ten thousand men to me? When would
all the subjects that Andrianimpoina and Radama left to me be
exhausted? I therefore tell you again, that you owe your lives to
the solicitations and entreaties of the people; for you have said
the idols are nothing—the divination is nothing—the Vazimba are
nothing—you have ceased praying to your deceased ancestors, but
to Jehovah and Jesus alone you pray, and not to the idols and to
your ancestors which made the twelve sovereigns sacred. You
have dared to announce that these things are nothing. And you
have also used such expressions as these, ‘ Believe in him,’ ‘ Follow
his laws, ‘ Do not war,’ &c.; and what is the purport of these ex-
pressions? I detest them, saith Ranavalomanjaka.

“] will now tell you what I have decided to do with you, for
you have acted according to your own discretion, you have done
things at random, without asking the permission of your sove-
reign. Your honours you did not obtain either by riches or by
inheritance, but your good disposition and wisdom obtained these
for you. They were conferred upon you at first by my predeces-
sor; nor did I subsequently change what he had bestowed upon
you, but rather increased your honours. At present, however, I
find you have mixed so much evil with the good done by you;
you have attached so many knots to your good deeds—you have
made a fine basket of a beautiful grass, but its bottom you have
made of bulrushes which has tarnished the whole work—you
have spun out a fine cotton thread, and tied to it a piece of Rofia
thread ; the honours bestowed on you, therefore, since you have
so transgressed my laws as to deserve death—and your lives are
only spared through the supplications of Imerina—your honours, I
say, will I throw into yonder river, to be carried over yonder
cataract Ifarahantsana, fur you have endeavoured to change the
customs of our ancestors. There the half of the honours of some
of you shall be thrown, and the third part of the honours of others,
and even all the honours which some possess, shall be thrown to
yonder river; but the precise number shall be in proportion to
their offences. All this is arranged on paper, and shall be read
to you presently.

‘“* And with regard to you, twelve senior teachers, you were
young in Radama’s time, but you had more knowledge and wis-
QUEEN’S FINAL MESSAGE. 139

dom than the people generally, and on that account Radama con-
ferred honours upon you; and when I succeeded him, I did not
change what he had done to you, but you have changed, for under
my reign you have not shown your wisdom in doing good for the
kingdom, but you have used such expressions as ‘ Believe in him,’
‘ Follow him,’ ‘Do not fight,’ ‘Do not swear,’ &c. What is
the meaning of all this? Now for all this evil which you have
done in my country, I would have so treated you, that you should
never have had power to do either good or evil again, had not the
cries and entreaties of Imerina prevented me. As to your honours,
you did not obtain them with money or by inheritance ; and since
the good you have done has been mingled with so much evil, I
will, in the first place, take off the half of your honours, and then
take one from the half that remains, for you have been the leaders
in this affair, therefore that number of your honours shall be
thrown to yonder river to be carried down the cataract.

** And as to you, Ratsimihara, though you are my relative and
one of my family, I know no relative, I recognise no friend when
the laws of my country are violated. I would even willingly de-
liver up a wise man like you to be punished with death, according
to my laws, but the mouth of Imerina has, for this time, saved
your life. I asked you were you baptized, you answered in the
negative ; but I find that this was not true; and when I insisted
upon your telling the truth, you asked for the tangena, and when
I offered that to you, then you would not venture ; and therefore
I tell you, that although you are my relative, you are indebted
altogether for your life to the entreaties of Imerina; but as to
your honours, seven of them shall be thrown into yonder river to
be carried down the cataract. You are reduced from the ninth
to the second honour.* “ And

* All this representation of his case was glaringly and prepos-
terously false and unjust. Ratsimihara married the youngest
sister of Radama, and was among the first natives who were
baptized and admitted to church fellowship. Neither himself
nor his wife ever denied these facts, though charged by the Queen
with doing so. She had merely attended the preaching occa~
sionally, and by mistake confounded this with the charge of
baptism, admitting the latter when she meant only the former.
Her husband explained it, and this explanation is cruelly con-
strued into prevarication. It was in vain to attempt offering
further explanation where a prior determination was manifest to
accept none. The pretended regard to stern justice in punishing
even a relative, only adds hypocrisy to cruelty in the transaction.
140 QUEEN’S FINAL MESSAGE.

“ And with regard to the guilty multitude who have no honours,
you brought to the Queen a dollar and a bullock to crave for
pardon, and the whole mass of the people have entreated for you,
and their entreaties have also saved your lives, and I forgive you
on that ground, and order you to pay thisfine, é. e. the dollar and
the bullock, each district separately must pay it. (Here the
name of eachdistrict was specified.) And in paying this I shall
pardon you for this time, but if ever guilty of these things again,
remember, your property and honours will not be sufficient to
atone for your offences, your lives alone will suffice the next time.

‘ And with regard to your slaves, I have warned you before of
this; but astonishing to say, you took no notice of it. Have I
not told you not to teach your slaves to read and write? but you
have taught them notwithstanding ; however, I warn you once
more that I may have nothing to reflect upon hereafter. Let me
tell you plainly, that if I find you teaching the taratasy (or books)
to your slaves, or allow them to learn, I shall treat the slaves as
dogs that devour sheep ; their persons shall atone for their crimes,
for I will, first of all, behead them, and then a heavy fine shall be
imposed on the owners, and when that fine is paid, I will choose
what further punishment to inflict upon the person of the owners,
saith Ranavalomanjaka.

« And with regard to the mode of prayer, (meaning thereby
Christianity,) there was nothing of this kind in the time of the
twelve sovereigns, nor in the time of Andrianimpoina, but under
my reign you have attempted to change the mode of praying. I
will tell you how you are to pray. You must first of all invoke
Andriamanitra Andriananahary, then all that is sacred of the
twelve sovereigns, and of the earth and heaven, of the sun and
moon, and then of the twelve holy mountains, and of the sacred
idols, namely Ikelimalaza, Ifantaka, Imahavaly, Imanjakatsiroa,
for they have made sacred the twelve sovereigns, and if any change
this mode of praying, I will punish them with death, saith Rana-
valomanjaka.”

The reply of the officers reduced in rank was as
follows :—

“May you live, Madam, to reach old age, &. Now, O
Andriamanitra Andriananahary, O all that is sacred of Alasora,
of Imerimanjaka, of Ambohitrabiby, of Antananarivo, of Am-
bohimanga, of Ambohidratrimo, of Ilafy, of Inamehana, of
Ambatofimanjana, of Ambohimalaza, of Ambohimanambola, and
of Ialamasina ;—O all that is eacred of the earth and of the
MEN, NOT MEN, BUT HOGS. 141

heavens, O all that is sacred of the sun, of the moon, and of the
stars ; O all that is sacred of the twelve sovereigns; O all that is
sacred of Ikelimanjaka, and of Ifantaka, of Imanjakatsiroa, and
of Imahavaly. We present the hasina* to you, Ranavalomanjaka,
may you reach to old age. And after the hasina is presented, it
remains for us to assure you of our loyal affection, that you may
confide in us. Although we have been called to account by you
for our offences, and are reduced in rank, yet, if we grow weary
of serving you, if our hands hang down on account of this, if we
serve you from mere compulsion on this account—if, on account
of our being reduced in rank, we do not endeavour, to the ut-
most of our power, to maintain you on the throne, we thus call
upon God, O Andriamanitra Andriananahary, O all that is sacred
of the land which we inhabit, and of the heavens above us, O
all that is sacred of the sun, of the moon, and of the stars, of the
twelve sacred villages, and of the twelve sovereigns, and of all
the sacred idols, we call upon you to annihilate us, and to leave
us no child to succeed us.

In the next place, it is our duty to express our unfeigned.
gratitude to you, Ranavalomanjaka. It is pleasing to us, it is
delightful to us, may you reach to old age without suffering
affliction, may you equal in length of days the human race, for
you have not delivered up a single person to be put to death for
this great violation of your laws*-you have not reduced to
slavery our wives and children, and our property has not been
confiscated. We again beg of you to take courage, Ranavaloman-
jaka, for our flesh is not consumed, our bones are not broken,
the life is still here, and although reduced in rank, yet rank is not
the boundary of service we owe, but life itself: take courage,
therefore, Ranavalomanjaka, for as long as life is here, we shall
not relax in your service: for to whom did Andrianimpoina and
Radama leave the kingdom but to you alone? And if we do
these things again, for which we have been now reduced in rank,
kill us, Madam, for we must be hogs and not men, for men dare
not venture to ehallenge the sun.”

Huwiliating servility! Preposterous sycophancy!
The heart sickens amidst such falsehood and flattery, the

* Which means a dollar or sum of money paid as an acknow-
ledgment of the sovereignty of the party receiving it.
142 LOYALTY.

inevitable results of a despotism that destroys all that is
noble and generous in human bosoms.

It is difficult to give the exact number of the officers
who were reduced in rank at this time, but certainly they
amounted to not less than 400.

At the kabary above described, one officer of the name
of Ravalisoa, of the eighth rank, was promoted to the ninth,
for having refused to attend religious instruction while
invited by some Christian friends. When urged to go,
he replied, ““When the Queen, and his superior officers
would order him to attend, he would, but not before.’?
This loyal reply delighted her Majesty so much, that she
raised him to more exalted honours.

A nephew of Rainiharo, the highest officer in the army,
was also promoted from the fourth to the sixth rank. He
had been punctual in his attendance on the public ordi-
nances of religion for two or three years, and had esta-
blished a prayer-meeting at his house, and was therefore
as guilty as any in point of law, but being persuaded by
his uncle to accuse himself to the Queen befure her edict
was published, though, in fact, it was his uncle that did
it for him, he was promoted two honours. None of the
Christians felt mortified by the promotion of their young
friend ; they entertained a great respect for him; but
his promotion showed that the whole affair was conducted
with little regard to any principles of justice..

In the course of the second week in March, orders
were issued that all persons who had received any books
from the Europeans, whether directly or indirectly, should
deliver them up, and not conceal even a single leaf on
pain of death! A house was allotted for their reception
BOOKS COLLECTED. 143

near the court-yard, and persons appointed to take charge
of them. Those who had but little regard for the scrip-
tures took care to secure for themselves all the blank
leaves they could find. A number of valuable English
books were thus materially injured. Many, however,
entertained too much veneration for their Bibles to spoil
them for the sake of a few leaves of white paper. It
would be impossible to describe the sorrow and grief
manifest in the countenances of some of the people when
delivering up their books. Few, perhaps, actually did
deliver all they had in their possession; most kept a
small portion, either a psalter, a gospel, a hymn book, a
tract or a catechism.

A leaf of the New Testament was found one morning
not very far from the house of the first officer, having
Matth. xxiii. 13, scored with ink.* It was read and un-
derstood to be intended for the government, and a diligent
though unsuccessful search was made to find out the
parties who had dared to commit such an outrage.

Orders were sent to all the outposts to collect in the
books, for they had already found their way to most parts
of the island, especially through the military stations.
Some had been carried even 300 miles distance from
the capital. There is reason to believe that, although the
orders of the Queen, when received by the respective
governors of those stations, were faithfully issued, many
of the people neglected to obey them, and have ventured

* « Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for
ye shut up the kingdom of heaven against men; for ye neither
go in yourselves, neither suffer ye them that are: entering to:

go in.”
144 LEARNED EXAMINATION.

to retain, even to this day, some of the books that were
issued from the missionary press.

After it was supposed that the books were all collected,
the Queen appointed four of the officers of the palace,
Ratsimanisa, Ratiarailehibe, Ratiaraikely, and Ratsara-
hoby to examine them, and to ascertain whether any of
them were free from the obnoxious expressions. The twelve
senior teachers, as the best scholars, were called on to
read them to the officers. As the Bible was the largest
book among the lot, it was fixed on by the officers to be
read first. The beginning of the first chapter of Genesis
came first in course. The officers found no fault with
the first verse, but in the second, the word “ darkness”?
occurred, and as the Queen, it was argued, did not like
darkness, or any thing being said about it, the whole book
was at once condemned as improper to be used in the
schools, or circulated in the country. They next took up
a hymn-book, and a hymn was read, in which the word
“ Jehovah” happened to occur—the whole book was there-
fore immediately condemned. Then several of the tracts
and catechisms, &c. were read, but there was cither the
word ‘ Jesus Christ,” or “Jehovah,” or “ darkness,’?
or “ hell,” or ‘*Satan,”? or “ resurrection,” &e., in all
of them, and therefore they were all condemned. After
the verdict had been thus pronounced on all that had been
printed in the Malagasy language, the examination of the
books in other languages commenced. A Hebrew Bible
was taken up, of which the reader knew but little more
than his hearers, but which, as no one could correct him,
he managed to read off without much hesitation; still
there was something in the very sounds of this book the
DISLIKE TO LOGIC. 145

officers did not comprehend, and so it was condemned.
All the English and French books, with the few Latin and
Greek there happened to be among them, shared the
same fate. The whole of these books were some time
afterwards sent back to the missionaries, and the govern-
ment kept none of them ; treating them as European pro-
perty rather than their own.*

The twelve senior teachers, who were still learning the
English language with the missionaries, were now left
without books to read. An attempt was made by the
Rev. D. Griffiths to teach Watts’s Logic to the youths
under his instruction. The youths strongly objected to
it, and applied to the queen to he released altogether
from attending the instructions of the missionaries. Ratsi-
manisa, the first officer of the palace, told them it was
their duty to attend during the short time the mission-
aries would remain ; adding, however, that if Mr. Griffiths
should attempt to give them books to read that were not
deemed lawful, they should give him a sound beating to
bring him to his senses!

The members of the mission who remained continued
to impart instruction and comfort to the native Christians,
so far as opportunities could be found, up to the period

* A very ludicrous circumstance, almost too ridiculous to
mention, occurred in connexion with the care taken of these
books by the Government, so long as they remained in their
hands. The house in which they had been collected was large,
unoccupied, and overrun with rats. To avoid the property being
injured by these animals, the Government directed the soldiers to
provide cats, and keep them on the spot, and an allowance per
week was made from the royal treasury to purchase meat for
these four-footed guards.

H
146 LOVE TO THE SCRIPTURES.

of their departure in the year 1836. The number of
converts had gradually increased, notwithstanding the
‘difficulties they laboured under, and the imminent dan-
ger to which they were exposed. The forbidden ordi-
nance of the Lord’s supper was occasionally administered .
to them in private ; and several received baptism. Their
expectation of being shortly left without a teacher urged.
many of them to diligence in reading the scriptures; and
it may be affirmed that they increased in spiritual know-
ledge, under their painful and disadvantageous circum-
stances, even more than they had done before the publica-
tion of the edict suppressing Christianity. A bond of union
was also formed among the Christians themselves during
this time of trial, which continues to this day. They
were supplied with a copy of the whole Bible. Some
walked upwards of 100 miles to obtain it. A poor man,
in a very feeble state of health, who had not been able to
quit his house for five months, on hearing that the
teachers were preparing to leave, determined to make the
attempt to walk to the capital in order to secure for himself
a complete copy of the sacred volume. Though he had
sixty miles to travel in this delicate state of health, he did
not rest until he had reached the house of the missionary
and obtained this pearl of great price. It is impossible
to express the joy evinced in the countenance of this de-
voted Christian on receiving the sacred book. He pressed
it to his bosom and exclaimed, “ This contains the words
of eternal life ; it is my life, and I will take as much care
of it as of my own life.” He has continued faithful ever
since, but has been lately compelled to leave his peaceful
PEAR OF DEATH. 144

home, and seek refuge in the forests, on account of his
adherence to the faith.

The Christians at the capital were now unable to unite
in singing, and yet they longed to sing one of the songs
of Zion. Some of them learnt to play the tunes on the
native instrument called the valiha or harp; and felt no
small delight in that exercise. A wife of one of the
Christians accused her husband of this to Razakandrian-
aina, the officer who had brought an accusation against
them in the first instance. He listened gravely to her
accusation, and then replied that he did not believe it,
for, said he, “they are too much afraid to transgress again
the laws of the queen; they pretend they can do great
things, but when it comes to the crisis, they give up their
religion to save their lives. When I used to go out after
sunset before the suppression of Christianity, I sometimes
overheard them singing, “ Izaho tsy matahotra,”

* J have no dread of death,
For Jesus Christ is ever nigh.”
I felt annoyed at them, and began to think they really
did not fear death; but as soon as the queen ordered
them to come and accuse themselves, they ran from every
direction, confessed their crimes, craved the queen’s par-
don, and promised to do so no more. I am almost con-
vulsed with laughter to see some that I heard singing a
few weeks previously, ‘I have no dread of death,’
coming almost out of breath to accuse themselves, in
order to avoid death. I said within myself, these men
were singing falsehoods; they are as mueh afraid of
death as any body else. I do not believe there is one
H2
148 PILGRIM’S PROGRESS.

real believer in this country, besides the Europeans. I
have heard indeed that many Europeans in their own
country have continued obstinate and suffered death for it,
but they have not done so here.” These remarks made a
deep impression on the minds of many of the Christians ;
and there is reason to believe that the reproof they con-
tained, coming from such a man, proved a blessing in
arousing them to greater fortitude, decision, and con-
sistency.

Before the final departure of the missionaries from the
capital, the “ Pilgrim’s Progress” was translated into the
Malagasy language, by Mr. Johns, and eight copies were
written out by some of the Christian natives at full length,
and left in their hands, each copy being made the joint
property of several individuals. They read it over fre-
quently, and prized it next to the Bible. There is reason
to hope that the perusal of it has been the means of the
conversion of some, and the recovery of others, who had
backslidden from the paths of truth.

A copy of it was sent forward to Mr. Freeman, then in
England, where a subscription was made by various
friends in different parts of the country in order to have it
printed. The Religious Tract Society liberally promoted
the object, and 1000 copies were struck off, many of which
are now in the hands of our suffering friends. One of
the manuscript copies, into which Mr. Johns had put
the plates he had taken out of his printed copy, fell
into the hands of the government, on the apprehension
of one of the Christians. Some of the officers read part
of it, but found it remarkably mysterious. They were
THE SHINING LIGHT. 149

not aware of its being a translation from an English
book, but supposed it to be some of the dreamings of
these new fanatics. They came to the account of the
glimmering light that Evangelist directed Christian to
observe, and this completely puzzled them; “a little
glimmering distant light”’—what can that mean? and
they laid the book down, in absolute despair of com-
prehending it.
150 MISSIONARIES.

CHAPTER VII.

Events occurring in the history of the Mission from the Queen’s
edict, Ist March, 1835, to the martyrdom of Rasalama in 1837.

Tue immediate effect of the queen’s edict was to deprive
the missionaries of all sphere of appropriate missionary
labour in Madagascar, and, therefore, to force upon them
the inquiry what they could or ought to attempt in the
prosecution of their work, either by evading the edict or
acting in direct defiance of it. The duty of the Christian
missionary, to yield obedience to the supreme authority of
the Saviour in seeking to make known his gospel to every
creature, was unhesitatingly admitted, and felt to remain
unaltered, whatever might be the laws and edicts of
human princes— Whether it be right in the sight of
God to hearken unto you rather than unto God, judge
ye.” But the present was a question of practicability.
To do what the Malagasy government had commanded
should not be done was attended not merely with diffi-
culty and danger, but with physical impossibility; and
this reduced the question of what the missionaries ought
to do within a small compass. They could not collect
the natives to address them, for the natives durst not and
would not be collected to be addressed ; the congregations
were scattered; individual converts might venture by
stealth to visit the missionaries and converse with them ;
REMOVAL FROM MADAGASCAR. 151

unbelievers would not come, and durst not listen—they
knew they were exposed to imminent danger if they did,
and they had no inelination to risk the danger. Mis-
sionaries might have resolved to visit their houses, but
they could not gain access to the natives ; for it was now
death to a native to lend an ear to their mstruction on re-
ligious subjeets. Nor could the missionaries find even
useful oceupation in their schools. They had no liberty
te communicate instruction there: everything printed was
prohibited ; and to teach a few children to write on slates,
and that writing to consist only of names of villages, &c.,
amd not anything mvolymg sentiment of any kind, was the
only sphere of labour allowed them in their capacity of
“ teachers.”

The only thimg left for them to do was to complete the
translation and printing of the Scriptures. A part of the
Old Testament was as yet unfinished, namely, from
Ezekiel to Malachi, and a portion of Job. To this object
they successfully and unremittingly devoted their energies,
resolved, if it were possible, net to quit the country till
the whole of the Scriptures were complete m the Malagasy
language; and, happily, they saw their determination
effected. Mr. Baker, the printer, as the sheets of the trans-
lation were put into his hand, conrposed the whole himself
at the press, as the natives who had been taught the art of
printing were no longer permitted to assist in furtherance
of any such design.

The facts of the case as they occurred were laid before
the directors of the Missionary Society, and their advice
solicited ; still, as no communications could be received
from them before June, 1836, sixteen months from the
152: MISSION NOT POLITICAL.

time of the queen’s edict, it was deemed expedient by the |
members of the mission on the spot to come to a resolu-
tion on their own responsibility for their present guidance,
and it was agreed, that part of them should retire from .
Madagascar, and others remain another year to see if any
changes took place, or were likely to take place, and to -
await the instructions of the Society. One circumstance
that led to the decision of the withdrawment of part of
the mission was the view taken by the queen’s govern-
ment, that the mission had some political design. This
was of course denied by its members. The government
then assumed this position: “‘If its design is not political,
it can have no object in remaining in the country after its
religious efforts are made unlawful ; and we shall now see,
by the conduct of the missionaries, whether they are poli-
tical agents or not. If religion, as they affirm, is their
only end in being here, and that can now be no longer
prosecuted, because the queen forbids it, they can have
no end in remaining, and will retire. If they remain, it
proves they have something else in view besides religion ;
and as that something must be political, we detect them
of falsehood, and hold them guilty of being political
spies.”

Whether the government itself really believed this
argument, it may be difficult to ascertain. Many of its
members no doubt did. It was the ostensible view they
took of the case, and it required the missionaries to act
at once with caution and decision.

It also weighed strongly with the missionaries, in the
conclusion they came to, that their best and wisest friends
among the native converts advised them to leave, at any
TIME OF ANXIETY. 153

rate for a time, and to retire as far as Mauritius :—not to
abandon Madagascar as a lost case, but not to exasperate
the government by seeming to act in defiance of its de-

termination. Any such defiance would not only be re-
' sented and bring vengeance on its authors, but defeat
the object, and render the renewal of the mission less
probable at the time, and far more difficult at a future
time.

Messrs. Freeman, Cameron, Chick, and Kitching, left
Madagascar in June, 1835; Messrs. Johns and Baker
remained till July of the following year. ‘ That year,”
as Mr. Baker justly remarks, in a letter to the directors,
“was a year of suspense, anxiety, and pain, to the mis-
sionary families that remained, not often paralleled even in
the vicissitudes of the history of missions. The servants
of the missionaries who had left were subjected to the
murderous ordeal of tangena, and two of them died. An
infant of another was suffocated the day after its birth by
the queen’s express orders, on account of the ‘ fatal day’
of its birth. ‘The oppressions of the government became
more and more cruel. Sunday was especially and pur-
posely desecrated by public works and amusements. Vice
disease, and poverty, increased fearfully.

“In the mean time, those who had preserved their
faith in the word of God became gradually known to us
and to each other. Slowly and cautiously did they open
their hearts even to their most intimate friends. Some-
times a recognition took place by a reference being made
to the words in Jeremiah, xxxviii. 15: ‘If I declare it
unto thee wilt thou not surely put me to death?’ to
which the answer would be from the following verse :—

H3
154 BOOKS BURIED.

‘So Zedekiah sware secretly unto Jeremiah, saying, as
the Lord liveth, that made us this soul, I will not put
thee to death, neither will I give thee unto the hand of
these men that seek thy life.’

“ After a time the natives began to hold secret meet-
ings at our houses and their own, and on the summits of
solitary mountains, whence, amidst the treeless hills and
vales of Imerina, they could observe the approach of
strangers at a very remote distance. These latter were
their favourite places of assembly, since they could there
freely sing to the praise of their God and Saviour without
fear of being overheard, and none so well as afflicted
Christians know how soothing oftentimes to the afflicted
heart is the language and music of a hymn.

“ At length July, 1836, arrived, when the government
expected that we should leave of course. We had as yet
received no advice from the Society, and it seemed te us
a solemn duty to bear, by our voluntary withdrawal, a
public testimony to the simplicity and integrity of our
object as Christian Missionaries, since we could no
longer remain in our missionary capacity. Accordingly,
after several unsuccessful efforts to obtain from the go-
vernment even the most restricted permission to teach
and print, we decided for a period, at least, to relinquish the
mission. After leaving there about seventy complete Bibles,
and several boxes of Psalters, Testaments, Spelling and
Hymn Books, Catechisms, and Tracts, among the native
Christians, chiefly buried under ground for greater se-
curity, we sorrowfully, and in great depression of mind,
left, and reached Mauritius in September, 1636.”

Just before our friends set out from the capital, the
RAFARAVAVY’S CONVERSION. 155

storm of persecution burst forth afresh against the Chris-
tians, and its earliest object was Rafaravary. She hed
been a convert prior te the suppression of Christianity.
Previous to her eenversion, she was 2 roost deveted
iMelater—one of the most zealous of the zealous there m
gastaining the worship of idols; and it is well known
thet often she and her relations in their attachment to
idolatry had sacrificed not merely the comforts and con-
veniences, but even the absolute necessaries of life. At
@ moment when a meal of rice has been wanting in the
house, the money required to purchase it has been
actually paid for the support of idol-worship. Brought
under the influence of the gospel through the medium of
conversation with a native believer,—the inquiry was
awakened in her heart, how she might escape the broad
road, walk in the narrow path, and obtain eternal life.
Brought afterwards into immediate connexion with the
Missionaries, we have reason to believe that the heart of
the pagan was changed by the grace of the Holy Spirit.
She then became one of the most zealous converts; she
obtained one of the largest houses she could in the capital,
for the purpose of instituting a prayer meeting. By her
simplicity, fervour, and consistency, she induced many
to attend on the regular means of grace.

It will illustrate the manners of the country and the
spirit of the government to detail somewhat minutely
the circumstances attending the apprehension of Rafa-
ravavy, and the rather, as so lively an interest has subse-
quently been created in favour of this Christian woman.

. On the 17th of July, 1836, which happened on a
Sabbath day, three of Rafaravavy’s servants went to the
156 ACCUSATION AND

Judge Rajery to lay an accusation against her. They did
not enter the house to speak to the judge himself, but
stated the accusation to his dekana* outside. The charge
was, that Rafaravavy and nine of her friends were ob-
serving the Sabbath, reading the book which the queen
had prohibited, and continually praying to Jehovah Jesus
according to the custom of the Europeans; and if, said
the servants, you do not believe us, go directly to her
house and listen outside, opposite to where her bed stands,t.
and most probably you will hear her and her friends,
for they are there every Sabbath evening and often on
other nights. Some of the dekana being favourable to
Christianity delayed to carry the accusation at once to
the judge, but said they would go and listen first. One
of them accordingly went immediately to the house.
Rafaravavy was alone at the time, and had been reading
just in the ‘very place mentioned; but, having felt un-
usually reluctant to continue reading that evening, she
had left the spot a few moments before the officer had
reached the house, and had retired to the other end of
the dwelling. The man, after listening a few moments
and hearing nothing, left, and mentioned the circum-
stance to a friend of Rafaravavy, who forthwith commu-

* A word formed from an imperfect native pronunciation of
“ aide-de-camp,” and signifying all who are employed in writing,
conveying messages, acting as secretaries, &c., either to military
officers or to.civil or judicial fuuctionaries.

+ As all the native houses are built in a similar manner, and
the internal arrangements are the same, this description was per-
fectly natural. The door always faces the west, and is placed at
the southern extremity of the wall. The window, for there is
seldom more than one, is also on the west, but at the northern
extremity, and the bed is in the corner facing the window.
CONDUCT OF RAFARAVAVY. 157

nicated it to her. She immediately ran with all her
books to one of the missionaries, hastily told her story,
and returned home. She heard nothing further on the
business that night. The three servants did not return
home, but remained among the servants of the judge,
until her father, after hearing what had transpired,
fetched them and put them in irons, in which they con-
tinued till the queen had decided on the case of Rafara-
wavy. They were afterwards released by the humane and
Christian like interference of their accused mistress, by
whom they were addressed with so much earnestness,
fidelity, and affection, mingled with many prayers and
tears, that she found reason to hope that they who had
not believed, now through her mercy obtained mercy.
In the course of the evening the dekana informed Rajery
of the charge, who remarked, that though it was an accu-
sation brought by slaves,* such a daring offence must not
be allowed to pass unnoticed. ‘‘ Go,” said he, “ and tell
her father to come here in the morning.” The father
accordingly went; the judge said, ‘* Your daughter, it is
affirmed, still continues to pray, and it is said that she
and her companions are ten in number : it would be better

* The father of Radama made a law that the accusation of
slaves against their masters should not be received, and that law
is till acted upon when it suits the purposes of those in power ;
but when it is more convenient to violate it, they do so. A short
time before the events above mentioned took place, a slave had
accused Ratsimanisa, the youngest brother of Rajery, the judge,
of having robbed the queen of money; the accusation was re-
jected because made by a slave, and the slave was punished with
death for transgressing the law in accusing his master. The
accusation made by the slaves of Rafaravavy’s father against her
was, however, listened to.
158 STEADPASTNESS.

for her to accuse herself before the accusation is laid
before the queen. Go you and tell her to state the names
ef all her companions; this may extenuate her offence.
This ivdeed is not a trifle; it will go hard with her.”
She was now at home, and many fervent prayers had
she offered up during the night, that she might have
strength to confess Christ before men, and to lay down
her life for his sake if # were his will that she should
then suffer death. She remembered the admonitory
words of the Saviour, Matt. x. 33, “ Whosoever denieth
me before men, him will I also deny before my Father
which is in heaven.” She was convinced at the time
that she must either deny Christ or suffer death, and
she felt that she would rather die than deny the Saviour
whom she loved. She, therefore, resolved to retire to a
village belonging to the family, about a mile or two
distant from the capital, preferring, if . condemned
to die, to be put to death out of the capital rather
than at Ambohipotsy, the usual place of execution.
Before she had gone far from her house, her friends
stopped her and advised her to return. At last her
father came and said, “ What is this that I hear,
child? It is said that you still continue to pray, is it
true?”’ She replied, “ Yes, I do pray.” The old man
was exceedingly vexed and grieved: “ Astonishing,”
said he, ‘‘ you do pray and are not ashamed to own it;
I know not what to think of you?” “ But, dear father,”
said she, “I have done it, and how can 3 deny what is
true?” The father replied, “I am really astonished at
you; even the whole body of the people when unitedly
craving for pardon could scarcely obtain it, and you
OF RAFARAVAVY. 159

again dare to disobey the law of the queen! Who are
your companions that united with you?” She replied,
“Ask the accusers, I cannot tell you who are my com-
panions.” ‘ You perhaps prefer death,” said he, “since
you vainly persist in this stubbornness.” ‘‘ Who, then,”
said she, “am Itoname?” ‘ All,” he replied, “ who
are in the habit of visitimg you here.” “If I must ac-
cuse al] those that visit me,” said she, “I must, then,
put you and my relations among the first, for you visit
me as often as any.” “ Have we been uniting with you
in the prayers?” said he. A man from the judge came
and called the father out, and said to him, “ You had
better go and do what you think will be the best for her,
there is no use in trying to get her to accuse her com-
panions. These praying people are so stubborn that, even
if you were to kill them and cut them in pieces, they will
not impeach their companions; you had better go to the
judge and do what you can at once.” The father took
the advice, went to Rajery the judge, and said, “‘ We come,
Sir, to accuse ourselves, conscious to ourselves of what
we have done, not interfering with other people’s busi-~
ness, but aware of our own.” After a little further con-
versation on the obstinacy of Rafaravavy, Rajery sent
the accusation to the queen. On hearing it she became
extremely angry, and said, “Is it possible that there is
any one so daring as to defy me, and that one too a wo-
man? this is annoying to me; go and put her to death
at once, it cannot be borne.” Rainiharo and Rajery the
judge and Rasendrasoa, a woman of high rank and in-
fluence, to whom the queen is particularly attached, made
great interest on her behalf, specifying the important
160 CALMNESS AND PEACE.

services which had been rendered to the government by.
Rafaravavy’s father, as well as her brother, who had
been a general in the army, which is the 10th honour,
but was reduced to the 4th soon after the edict was pub-
lished, on account of his attendance on public worship.

Although she had returned her Bible and other books
which she had had in her possession at the time, she
retained a few tracts, and among them, one on the Holy
Spirit; and as she had now but little hope of her life
being spared, she was very diligently employed in ex-
amining her state before God, that death might not come
upon her by surprise. She derived much consolation
from the tract named, and especially from the expressions
uttered by some humble and devout Christian, “I will
cast myself at the feet of Jesus, and if I perish, I will
perish there ;” to which some one had replied, “ And if
you perish there, you will be the first that ever did; for
sooner shall the heavens and the earth pass away than
the Saviour reject any one coming to him.”

During this time of suspense and danger, she con-
trived to reach Mr. Johns’ house just before he and his
family, with Mr. Baker and family, left the capital. It
was about three o’clock in the morning when she came,
and while as yet, so far from being certain that she should
not be put to death, was fully expecting it. The inter-
view was affecting on both sides. Mrs. Johns, in an
account she shortly afterwards transmitted to a friend,
remarks, “I shall never forget the serenity and com-
posure she displayed while she related to me the conso-
lation she enjoyed in pleadifig the promises, and in
drawing near to God in prayer.” On bidding farewell
PUNISHMENT. 161

to each other, and not expecting to meet in this life again,
she desired her special salutations to all the churches of
the Redeemer, and begged that they would often re-
member in their intercessions “ The little flock in Ma-
dagascar.”’

On the day our friends above mentioned left the
capital, the queen decided that she would, at that time,
spare her life. She sent by the constables and the
dekana of Rajery to say to her that the valuable ser-
vices of her father and brother had induced her to
pardon her for that time, but that she should be “very
ilana ;?? an expression which means that she should
pay a pecuniary fine, equivalent to half the amount of
her estimated value as if sold into slavery; and she was
severely threatened and warned, that if ever she should
be again found guilty of a similar offence, she must not
hope for pardon, life alone would then make atonement
for the crime. She was then valued at fourteen dollars,
her property was also valued, and she had to pay half the
total amount. Towards this sum twelve dollars were
sent to her by Mr. Johns to remove any difficulty there
might be in obtaining her release. She twice declined
accepting it, and at length only received it on under-
standing that ten dollars were to be considered as given
her on behalf of the Christians in England, and to express
their affectionate sympathy.

The servants had stated in their accusation, that there
were nine of her friends in the habit of uniting with her
in prayer and reading the scriptures, but as she could
not be induced to accuse them, they escaped detection at
that time, and none of them suffered except Rafaravavy
162 MEETINGS OF THE

herself. Soon after her release, she fownd that she was very
narrowly watched by her |father and friends, who lived
near her at the capital, so that she could find no oppor-
tunity of conversing with her Christian companions. To
remedy this, she determined to sell her house in town
and purchase one in a more retired spot, in the suburbs
of the capital, and she removed accordingly to Ambatona-
kanga. The little band of Christians continued to meet
frequently at her house, sometimes in the house of another
friend, and sometimes on a mountain. Occasionally they
went upwards of twenty miles, to some friends living at
that distance, so as to enjoy without interruption their
social meetings; which, as they have often since remarked,
were to them as showers of rain on the thirsty ground. The
mamber of those confiding in one another as sincere
Christians, and uniting together as such, rapidly increased,
and as many of them had been previously introduced to
each other’s confidence by the Missionary last among
them, and especially those coming from Vonizengo to
those residing in the capital, they became still more closely
united to each other in the holy bonds of Christian friend-
ship. Those from Vonizongo made the house of Rafara-
vavy their home during their residence in the capital,
which sometimes lasted several days or even weeks. In
this way she became well acquainted with the Vonizongo
Christians, to whom she was subsequently indebted (under
God) for the preservation of her life.

In the early part of the year 1827 Mr. Johns wrote
from Mauritius to some of the Christians at the capital,
intimating his intention of visitmg Tamatave in the
course of that season. Rasoamaka (Joseph) and others
NATIVE CHRISTIANS. 163

were deputed by the Christians to go and meet him at
Tamatave. They reached the coast a fortnight before his
arrival. They awaited him there, bringing with them
tidings of the state of the Christians. At the time they
set out from Imerina, their friends were living in peace
and tranquillity. Their harmony, mutual affection, zeal,
and consistency were highly encouraging, and their aug-
mented numbers proved that the cause of the Redeemer
was not absolutely arrested by the harsh measures the
queen had adopted. And the hope was entertained that
they might be permitted to continue enjoying without
molestation, their social meetings, and occasional seasons
of improvement.

They brought with them to Tamatave various letters
from their Christian friends, some two or three of which
it may be an acceptable service to insert here.

The first is a joint letter from the whole little band of
Christians, with their names affixed to it, addressed to
Messrs. Ellis and Freeman, and of which the following
is a translation :

“ Antananarivo, 24th Asombela (June), 1837.

ss HeattH and happiness to you, beloved friends, say the few
disciples of Jesus Christ here in Madagascar; let us unite in
praising God for the favours he has bestowed upon us since the
time that we wrote to you last year, for he has not forsaken us,
but guarded and kept us by day and night till the present time,
that we might not be overcome by evil, nor conquered by the
temptations of Satan, but he has enabled us to tread the narrow
path till now. Some two or three of our number have ended
their course, and have entered into their everlasting rest; and
two or three also have become lukewarm in their conversation
and their intercourse, yet our numbers have not decreased, but
have been rather augmented, and they are able to unite in con-
veying their thoughts in a brief letter to you.

164 LETTERS FROM HE

“ We have heard that our friend Mr. Johns purposed to come
to Tamatave, and we have appointed four of our companions to
go and meet him, and inform him of our condition, so that you
may hear of it.

“We do not perceive any change in the mind of the queen
with regard to Christianity. She remains the same. But we
have less interruption since the Europeans, our friends, left us,
as it is perhaps thought that we shall certainly forget the word
of God, now that we have no teachers here. The queen, how-
ever, does not know that the best teacher of all is still here with
us, the Holy Spirit.

“When we consider our guilt and our pollution, and the evil
that dwells in our hearts, then we soon faint; but when we
remember and reflect upon the mercy of God, and the redemp-
tion there is in Jesus, and when we call to mind the promises,
then our hearts take confidence, and we believe that Jesus can
cleanse us, and can bring us to heaven, though the way be
difficult ; and when we meet there, we will tell you all that has
befallen us by the way while yet here on earth.

“ By the strength of God we shall still go forward and not fear
what may befal us; but we will go in the power of the Lord,
and if a d by the people, we will still go straight forward,
for we know that if we deny him before men, Jesus will deny us
before his Father ; but if we confess him, he will also confess us,
when he shall come in the clouds to judge the world, and present
them that are his blameless before the Father for ever.

“‘ We desire to see you, Mr. Freeman. Would that we could
see you at Ambatonakanga, and preaching to us the Bible, which
we now possess. How great would then be our joy! Let us
unite in pleading with God that all the Missionaries and our
friends may return to us here in Madagascar; and let us not
cease to supplicate his blessing to save us, for the Lord hath
already heard your cry, and ours; for the kingdom of Jesus is
advancing in this country; as the leaven in the meal, so indeed
it is with the kingdom of heaven. Jesus will not quench the
smoking flax. We had some suspicions when the Missionaries
left us, lest God also should forsake us, like our friends ; but we
have seen that the word of promise is true, ‘ I will never leave
thee, I will never forsake thee.’ He has indeed remained with
us, and exceedingly great has been the joy of our hearts in prayer
and in conversing together on the things that relate to the life to
come.

NATIVE CHRISTIANS. 165

“ The Bibles that were left in our possession have been all
circulated, and many are wishing to obtain complete copies.
Do send us some, and let them be of a small print, so that we
may easily preserve them; and Pilgrim’s Progress also, if Mr.
Johns has not brought it, let it be sent very soon; but we are
hoping that it is finished, and already with him. We are very
desirous of it, for it rejoices our hearts. We have opportunities
of meeting on the mountains to sing and pray on the Sabbath,
and we have also three services here in the course of the week
after sunset. Our meetings are like congregations, through the
diligence of the disciples in conversing in season and out of
season; so that when we examine the state of ‘ Pilgrim’ we
wish to be like him in his progress. We are very desirous to
see the Pilgrim in print, for the translation of it is excellent ;
and as to the Bible, we much wish that it should not only be in
a very small print, but that it should have the marginal
references as you have it in the English. (Thus, Matt. xxiv. 31,
Ch. xiii. 41, 1 Cor. xv. 52, 1 Thess. iv. 16.)

“ All the Christians here are teaching others to read. There
are ten learning with one friend, six with another, four with
another, and so the number is quietly augmenting.

*¢ Here are our beloved friends, the messengers of the church,
conveying our letter to you. Our special salutations to the con-
gregations in England, and this is our request, Do not forget ug
in your supplications, but let us unite in our petitions before
God. We purpose to send to Tamatave every year to forward
letters to you, and to receive yours to us.”

The following is a translation of a letter from the four
native converts who conveyed the above letter to Ta-
matave, and who then wrote it while there, and ad-
dressed it to Mr. Freeman.

‘* Betovep FRIEND, “ Tamatave, 1st August, 1837.

*“ You are not forgotten, but still remembered by us. Our
salutations to you, from your friends who were appointed by the
disciples of Jesus Christ in Madagascar to visit you by means of
this letter sent. We have now reached Tamatave, and have
met with our beloved father Mr. Johns; with this we are
exceedingly delighted, for we had been expecting to meet him
beforehand ; and he told us how the good people are everywhere
166 LETTERS FROM THE

praying on our behalf, and supplicating God to aid us and to
bless us with all his favours.

“Yes, dearly beloved friend, cease not to ask God that he
would cause us to tread the narrow path, and pass through a
land where there are many adversaries. We know perfectly well,
that through the narrow gate is the way to the heavenly gate,
and we fear not to say, however steep should be the ascent, yet
we will go up, or however difficult the path it shall not weary
us, for we perceive that the painful will not last long, but we
shall obtain the good. We know that the king of the heavenly
city has himself trodden that difficult path; much more then
should Christian go there, who has yielded himself to the King
of Kings.

* Do not forget to intercede on our behalf. We know that
fervent prayer avails to save many. There are a few at pre-
sent returning and uniting with the congregation again. This
return of the people to us at present is matter of astonishment ;
it is like the case of the prodigal mentioned by Luke. And
those who received the word at first are not faint, but they are
diligent in conversing together, on the favour of God towards
them that believe, and the progress of Pilgrim, though he had
much to annoy him. And even now we are rejoicing on account
of our tribulations, for these tribulations, it may be, are employed
by God to urge us forward, and to separate us from hypocrites,
for you know that there were many at first who pretended to
submit, but only those who are set apart and chosen for himself
and who are willing to take up the cross and to follow Him,
remain in the church. Blessed be God, who hath caused us to be
likeminded in going forward together, through these light afflic-
tions, for the tribulations which we suffer now are not worthy to
be compared with the glory we shall have at the appearance of
our Lord Jesus Christ.

“* How much does the compassion of the Saviour console us
now! We are filled with wonder at the work of the Holy Spirit,
for it is he who persuades us to increase thus in love.

“ The word is indeed true that says, I will send unto you the
Comforter. It is expedient for you that I go away. Precious
to us now is Jesus. He is our Rock and our Shield, our Hope,
and our Life.

“ Whither should we go in our distress but unto Jesus, for he
has the words of eternal life. We find indeed, O friend, that
many are the adversaries here on earth. Our sovereign does not
NATIVE CHRISTIANS. 167

love the ‘ true faith,’ our rulers wax more oppressive, and the
mass of the people love vanity.

‘¢ Still we know that we must through much tribulation enter
into the kingdom of heaven.

* O God, do thou enable us to make the progress that Pilgrim
made, and if thy kingdom in Madagascar is to be advanced by
these means,* be it so, that the people condemn us guilty—He
that judgeth us is the Lord; though they should cause us to be
* lost,’t yet we prefer to be lost leaning on Jesus; and though
we should even be put to death, yet we prefer to die, in the Lord,
for we know that there is no condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus; and it is not the mouth of man that is to judge us
in the end, but God. We request of you to prepare for us some
books of instruction to help us at present, especially ‘ Pilgrim’s
Progress.’ It will be useful to print it, for there are many en-
couraged by the progress of Pilgrim, and very many here among
us wish to have it. We hoped to have it by Mr. Johns, but it
has not come yet. Of Bibles we have very few left ; when printed
again, do make it as we requested in the letter, from the church.

“ And we entreat of you, beloved friends, do not forget to
send us some means of instruction ; do what you can to help the
little flock here in Madagascar to increase their faith, their hope,
and their love, and to be the means of their seeing the hands of all
the saints beckoning to them and saying, Go forward, O friends.
And we assure you, friends, that your labours, as missionaries,
have not been at all profitless, nor have your united prayers and
preaching, especially those who have shed tears for us, been lost
or wasted on the ground.

“ God has set apart them that love him to confess him before
the wicked. Our word of salutation is from us all, to you and
Mr. Ellis, to acquaint you with our condition and what it is we
desire you should do for us, and which we have mentioned to
Mr. Johns, from whom also of course you will hear it.

** All of us at the capital intend sending to Tamatave yearly,
to give you an account of our condition. ——- ——~ intend to
come, and whoever may be appointed besides, if the Lord will.

‘‘ Farewell, till we meet, whether in this life, or the life to
come ; still we shall not forget to pray to God, that you may yet

* Referring to the oppressions and tribulations just before
mentioned.

t “ Lost,” a term meaning lost to freedom, reduced to slavery.
168 LETTER FROM RAFARAVAVY.

return again to us here, and if we do not meet in this life, yet
through the mercy of God, we hope we shall meet there, and
then we will tell the difficulties of the path, and the tribulations
we had whilst still on earth.

“ Finally, brethren, pray for us, that the Lord may add to us,
and that we may be saved froma people foolish and wicked,
* for all men have not faith.’

“ To Rev. J. J. Freeman.”

The following letter, written by Rafaravavy to Mr.
Johns, and sent to him at Tamatave, at the same time as
the two former letters, contains a valuable illustration of
the happy influence of Divine truth in the heart, pre-
serving the mind that is stayed on God in perfect peace.

“ Heattn and happiness to you, beloved friend. May you
enjoy with your family the blessing of God, and all the mission-
aries who have been with us, and the congregations where you
dwell. Make our salutation to the congregations in London, for
through the blessing of God we are well, and find opportunity of
visiting and telling you our condition by means ofa letter. As
to things here and the state of our relatives, wickedness is on the
increase and opposition too. They are now continually saying,
© You will be arrested by the Pei teiningia.® You are not
afraid of the sovereign; you are doing what she has forbidden.’
And they are saying also to terrify us, ‘ Many of you are Latsa-
bato,—something is being reckoned to your account.’ I an-
swered them, What is it that people are seeking after, except to
be latsabato? (to get something reckoned to their account.) This
they do for the sake of advancement in honour, and it is good ;
and lest I should not attain to it, is my grief. I rejoice that this
has happened to me. It brings to my remembrance Acts xiv. 22 ;
2 Tim. iii. 12. Blessed be God, who hath given to us access
through Christ Jesus. May he enable me to obey the words of
Jesus to his disciples, ‘If any one will come after me let him
deny himself” &c. ‘None of these things move me, neither
count I my life dear to myself that I may finish my course with
joy.’

* These terms, “ Tsi-tia-laingia,” and ‘ latsabato,” and the
allusions founded on them, are explained at the end of the letter.
HATING FALSEHOOD. 169

*T exhort you not to grieve, for your labour has not been in
vain in the Lord. The number of converts is increasing. If
our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, but it is the
power of God to salvation to them that are saved. Therefore I
take confidence. The power of God cannot be hindered. I
rejoice in the word, ‘ Have not I commanded thee? Be strong
and of good courage—Jehovah thy God is with thee in all thy
ways.” When thou passest through the water, &c. Isa. xliii. 2.
Jesus says, ‘ Fear not,’ Luke xii. 32. ‘ Yea, though I walk
through the valley of the shadow of death I will fear no evil.’
‘ Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him.’ ‘May I be found
in him, not having on my own righteousness,’ &c. Phil. iii. 9—14.
‘We walk by faith not by sight.’ Happy is she that hath be-
lieved—there shall be an accomplishment of what is spoken.
‘My soul doth magnify the Lord,’ Luke i. 46. So said Mary,
(and Rafaravavy adopted the expression as her own, having
assumed the name Mary.)

‘Pray for us—May God open a door for his word among
us,’’ 2 Thess. iii. 1, 2.

Two native terms occur in the above letter, requiring
some little explanation : “‘ Tsi-tia-laingia” means literally,
* not loving falsehood,” 7. e. hating falsehood. It is the
name of a silver-headed spear belonging to the govern-
ment, with the name of the Queen engraven on it, and the
word “ Tsi-tia-laingia.” It is carried by the vadintany
or constables, and other officers, when delivering the
messages of the government to the people. It is the
sign of authority, without which, messages, as from the
sovereign, are not considered valid. The name is then
also applied to the party carrying it, whether one person
or several, and the name then imports, tipstaff or sheriff’s
officers.

When the people taunted Rafaravavy that the ‘ Tsi-
tia-laingia” were coming to arrest her, and said, “ Wait
for them, they are on their way”—“ Yes,” she replied,
* IT am waiting—I am not running away like an evil-

I
170 OBTAINING HONOURS.

doer; but still Ido not exactly see those ‘ not loving
falsehood,’—(alluding to the meaning of the name)—for it
appears that you are the very persons that do love and
make falsehoods,” pointing to the charms and amulets on
their wrists, and calling them falsehoods, as in Jer. x. 14;
“ His molten image is falsehood.” She added that in
her opinion, the name Tsi-tia-laingia was only properly
applied to the sincere worshippers of the true God.

‘ Latsabato”’ means “ a stone or pebble cast,” as into
an urn, as a means of numbering, and it is applied to
denote the services any one may have rendered to the
government, and for which honours are to be bestowed
on him. A certain amount of service being reckoned
up and acknowledged, it is called a vato or stone, and
that being put to a person’s account, is called, /atsaka,—
“ cast in,” and the two words being compounded into
latsa-bato, signify both the sum total of the service,
and the person to whose account it is rendered. Jt may
be that some ten or twelve acts of service are required to
constitute one vato, and then a person may be latsa-hate,
one, two, three, or more, and be honoured or rajsed in
rank accordingly.

When the people said to Rafaravavy, a3 mentioned in
her letter to Mr. Johns, “ Many of you Christians are
latsa-hato, things are reckoned to your account,” it was
employed in a jeering and sarcastic sense; but to which
she replied with much good sense and a very appropriate
use of the figurative expression: “Is it not the very
custom and aim of the people to be letsa-bato,—to get
things reckoned to their account ?” so as to obtain eleva
tion and honour, It is that also which I am seeking for,
THE SAVIOUR LOVED. 171

and most desirous of obtaining, and only fear lest, after
all, I should fall short, and not obtain the reward. “ Be
faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life.”

It may not be uninteresting to add here an extract from
another letter, written by some other Christians in 1837,
and addressed to Mr. Johns :—

“Through the blessing of God we have enjoyed peace and
tranquillity beyond our expectation, since you left us, and we have
been able to meet together frequently for religious purposes. We
do not forget you, our beloved friends, on these occasions; we
offer up our prayers to God on your behalf, and we are persuaded
you also pray for us, 2 Thess. iii. 1 ; Col. iv. 3; 1 Thess. v.25. You
are constantly in our minds, day and night. How delightful it
would be to see you once more! Give our salutations to all that
love the Lord Jesus Christ, and beg of them to pray for the few
sheep in Madagascar, who are in the midst of wolves; tell them
we greatly value an interest in their prayers, for we believe those
words of the Apostle James, ‘The effectual fervent prayer of a
righteous man availeth much.’

“© We have great pleasure in telling you that our number has
much increased since you left. Some who had apostatized have
been restored, and some new ones have united with us and com-
menced learning to read. We want more Bibles, Testaments,
and spelling-books, which we hope you will be able to send us.
‘We are delighted with the Pilgrim’s Progress; it has been the
means, through the blessing of God, of awakening our zeal, and
stimulating us in our Christian course. Some have written out a
copy of it for themselves. We should be exceedingly glad, if it
were possible, to get some printed copies, that we might be able
to put one into the hand of every new convert.

“ Our beloved friend Ramamonjihasina died on his way home
from the expedition to the north. He was a beloved brother,
and we enjoyed frequently great pleasure in his society. Yet we
must not grieve for him, he is now with the Saviour whom he
leved. One of our friends was with him in his tent when he
died, and asked him a short time before he breathed his last,
whether he had any fear of death. He replied, ‘Why should I
fear to die, while Jesus is my friend? He hathloved me with an
everlesting love, and I love him because he first loved me. I am

12
172 ; TEARS OF LOVE.

persuaded he will not leave me now; and I am full of joy in the
thought of leaving this sinful world, to be for ever with my
Saviour.’

‘¢ We trust his death will stimulate us to labour in the work of
the Lord while it is day, for we are warned by the death of our
friends that the night cometh, when no man can work. May we
be ready, having our loins girded about, and our lights burning,
like men that wait for their Lord, that we too may be admitted
at the end of our days, into the joy of our Lord.”

In confirmation of the statement contained in the fore-
going letter respecting this young man, it may be added,
that it had been mentioned by some of the Christians who
associated with him that they never saw him mention the
name of Jesus without tears in his eyes. A missionary
to whom this was named took particular notice of the
circumstance in subsequent conversations with him, and
can bear testimony to the fact. One of his Christian
friends asked him one day how it was that his tears
always gushed forth when he mentioned the name of
Jesus? he replied, ‘‘ How can I do otherwise than feel
while I mention the name of that beloved Saviour who
suffered and died on the cross for me ?”

Some time after the departure from Tamatave of the
friends who had been deputed by the Christians to meet
Mr. Johns, he heard the mournful intelligence that the
persecution of the Christians had recommenced, and
had been attended with violence. He heard it acci-
dentally at first by some persons who had just arrived
from the capital, but as their statement was discordant
and unconnected, he supposed that they might refer to the
accusation laid against Rafaravavy the year preceding.
In a few days another party arrived from the capital, and
among them some of the Christians who had witnessed
RENEWED PERSECUTION. - 173

part of.the transactions before their departure; and
shortly afterwards a letter, from which the following ex-
tract is taken, was received, dated the 13th of August :-—

« As I have the utmost confidence in you, I may venture, though
at the risk of my life, to convey to you the melancholy tidings that
fourteen of the Christians are in trouble, (five men and nine
women ;) that they have been apprehended by the Tsitialaingia
for their profession, and that all of them are reduced to slavery ;
the men are sold with their wives and children, and all their
property confiscated. The single women are sold, and their
property confiscated. They are still in chains. It is reported
that Rafaravavy, the sister of Razakamanana, is the head of the
party. We have no hope of her life being spared. God alone
knows what will be the end of this. I hope you will raise your
fervent prayer to heaven for them and for this country.”

About the same time that this intelligence of the
apprehension of the Christians at the capital reached
Tamatave, it was also confidently stated that Rafaravavy
had been put to death. An intelligent native left the
capital just after the events above mentioned had oc-
curred, and had seen one of the Christians (Paul) in
irons; he reached Tamatave while Mr. Johns was still
there, related to him the circumstances as he had
learnt them before leaving home, and wrote from Tama-
tave a letter to Mr. Freeman, of which the following is an
extract:— Some of the Christians were assembling
secretly for worship, but have been accused ; they have
been reduced to slavery, and one of them, Rafaravavy, has
been put to death. Paul and his wife are among the
number of those reduced to slavery.” The statement was
confirmed by the vivd voce testimony of many other
persons who came from the capital to the coast at the
same time, and it was universally believed among natives
174 TEN ACCUSED.

and Europeans that Rafaravavy had been put to death.
The event, however, proved that this was not the case,
but, as will subsequently appear, that a young woman,
named Rasalama (and sometimes also called Rafaravavy),
suffered death for her profession of Christianity.

It appears that while our four friends were yet at Tama-
tave, visiting Mr. Johns, éen of the Christians had been at
once accused at the capital by Rabodotafikia and Izafy. The
former, a woman, was better acquainted with the Christians
than the latter, as she was nearly related to Andrianan-
toandro, one of the number. The accusers expected
to obtain a share of confiscated property by this affair.
A friend of one of them had said that they were going to
ruin those friends of the Europeans, and should get a
good share of the prize. They laid the accusation first
before the judges Rajery and Raintiaray, to the effect that
there were ten persons continually doing that which the
Queen had prohibited, observing the Sabbath, meeting
to pray to Jehovah Jesus,* and conducting themselves in
a manner altogether different from that of other people,
and that Rafaravavy was the head of the party, for they
met at her house. The judges acquainted Ratsimanisa
with the charge, who remarked on. hearing it, “ Then
by Ratsimahamaikiat they shall die, for they despise the
Queen’s law.” Rafaravavy was immediately taken up,
with Razafitsara and Ratiasoa, and the next day all the
rest of the ten accused persons, except Rasoamaka, who

* A phrase the natives had acquired themselves, but which
had not been employed by the missionaries.

+ The name of his sister. Men swear by a mother or sister;
women by a father or brother.
COMPANIONS NOT IMPEACHED. 175

had not yet returned from Tamatave, and Rafaralahi-an-
drianisa from Vonizongo, who was saved at that time,
chiefly because the accusers, though they knew him by
sight, did not by name. They knew he was a Dekana of
Andriantsimalia, and endeavoured to describe his person.
Several of the Dekana were sent for from Vonizongo, but
care was taken that the one wanted should not make his
appearance. After having failed to find him, the accu-
sers bemg pressed to produce the tenth, accused one of
Rafaravavy’s servants, who a year before had accused her
niistress. She confessed that she was a Christian, and shared
the same lot with those who were sold into slavery, never
to be redeemed. The ten were duly informed of the
charge against them by the Tsitialaingia. All were hot
at first put in irons. Those who had friends to be re~
sponsible for their not running away were allowed to te-
tain at home, till the Queen should decide on their
punishment. This did not take place for a fortnight.
Raferavavy during this time remained in her house at
Ambatonakanga. The messengers of the Queen came to
her four times. At their second visit they said, “the
Queen is not easily tired in making inquiries, she has
sent us again to ask you, who are your companions ; your
accusers says that yow are the head, and that it is you
who convene the congregation.” She replied, “ If my
accusers have said go, you had better ask them; they
will no doubt tell you all that they know, why do you
again ask me?” The messengers went in the same man-
ner to every one of the Christians then m confinement,
and tried to extort from them the names of their com-
panions. Refaravavy, and her ‘daughter, a child about
176 FIRMNESS. ‘

eleven years of age, were alone in the house when the
Tsitialaingia, accompanied by many of the people, the
vadintany, and the Dekana of the first officers, came.
She had been thinking, if such an event should occur,
what answer she ought to give, and determined with herself
to reply in the words of Peter, Acts iv. 19, 20, “ Whether
it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto you more ~
than unto God, judge ye; for we cannot but speak the
things which we have seen and heard.’? But when the
officers were standing before her door, she hesitated ;
and not knowing what they might say, thought it wrong
to fix in her mind previously the answer she should
give. The command of the Saviour to his disciples pre-
sented itself to her, “Take no thought (or be not anxious)
what ye shall answer, for it shall be given you in
that hour, &c.” After expecting some of her friends to
come to her, the officers entered, and said, “ This only
we ask of you, Rafaravavy: it is said that you pray again,
although prohibited by the sovereign at Imahamasina,
and for which crime scarcely could the people in a body
prevail with the Queen to obtain forgiveness ; it is said
you do it again.” She replied, ‘It is true, I do pray to
that God who made me and the world and all things
therein. Whatever the Queen may be pleased to do with
me, I confess I have done this.”” They inquired what
property she had, and who were her companions, that they
might tell the Queen. ‘ You must have some companions,”
said they ; “if you prayed alone, who could see you? Tell
therefore the truth, and do not deceive the Queen.” She
replied, “I have done it myself, and I confess it, but do
not ask me to tell of my companions. Ask my accusers,
CONFESSION. 17

they perhaps can tell you.” ‘*Why do you tell lies to
the Queen?” said they; “why do you not tell the truth ?”
“Tam not conscious,” she replied, “of any lie. God
tells me to speak the truth, and he hates liars. I wish
not to offend him. What liedoI tell?” ‘ You refuse
to tell who are your companions.” ‘That is not a lie,”
said she ; ‘‘ I do not say I have no companions, but I tell
you to ask my accusers who they are.” “If you refuse
to tell the Queen,” said they, ‘“ what you know, when she
asks you, you are not loyal, (literally the Queen is not
sweet to you.)”” “Ido not know how you can charge
me with that,” said she, “while I confess the charge
laid to me, and surrender myself to her, to do with me
whatever she pleases.”” ‘Let us go,” said they ; “there
is no reasoning with these obstinate people.”

The next day they came the third time, and said they
were sent again by the Queen, to ask her the names of
her companions, adding, ‘The Queen knows as well as
you do who they are, but she wishes to give you the op-
portunity of telling the whole truth.” ‘ Have not the
accusers told you already?” said she; ‘and you say the
Queen knows as well as I do, why then do you ask me
again?” “You are indeed,” said they, “exceedingly
obstinate, you will not say who were your companions,
nor where you met to pray ; Razafiteara told us that you
were her companion, and you pretend not to remember
or know any of your companions. We shall fetch Raza-
fitsara here to face you.” On her being brought, Rafa-
ravavy said, “We have prayed together, and we do not
deny it.” ‘ Where then did you pray?” said they.
“We prayed in this house,” said the two women, “ and

18
178 NAMES OF THE ACCUSED.

in the house of Razafitsara, and in many other places ;
indeed, wherever we went we endeavoured to remember
God, and prayed to him to forgive us, and to dous good.”
“ Have you not prayed on Ankatso?” said they (the
name of the mountain where they often met). “ Yes,”
said the women, “‘ but not there only ; but as we told you,
wherever we went and remembered God, in the house or
out of it, in town, in the country, or on the mountains.”
The measengers then went to the others who were in con-
finement. Rasalama when questioned, and deceitfully
told that all the rest had informed of her companions,
was induced to believe that the others had given in the
names of the Christians, and was influenced by this to
mention seven who had not as yet been impeached, viz,

Raintsiheva, usually called Paul,

Andrianomanana, usually called Simesn,

Andrianimanana,

Andrianantoandro,

Ramanana,

Raivo, and

Raminahy.
These were immediately apprehended and confined.
This happened about a week after the first party had
been put into confinement.

The messengers of the government came the fourth time
to Rafaravavy, and pressed on her the same questions
as before, and received similar replies. The whole was
now laid before the Queen. The answer that Paul had.
given, when the officers came to apprehend him, was so
just, that even the Queen and her advisers‘were placed
in difficulty how to find him guilty, with any show of
PRAYER OF A NATIVE. 179

justice. He said, “I have certainly prayed to that
God who created me and has supported me, and who
made all things, and is himself the fountain of all good,
to make me a good man. JI prayed that he would bless
the Queen, give her real happiness in this world, and
that which is to come. I asked him to bless the officers
and judges, and all the people, and to make them good,
so that there might be no more ‘jiolahy and mpandain-
gia,’ highwaymen and liars, in the country, and that God
would make all the people wise and good.”” Some among
the messengers whispered to one another, they saw no
harm in all that, for it was good. It seems that what
Paul said at the time had some effect on the minds of
some of the principal officers, for when a consultation was
afterwards held at the house of the chief officer as to
what should be done with them, one of them (Rainingi-
tabe) brought forward this answer of Paul in defence of
the Christians, and said, ‘ Let us do nothing rashly, lest we
should advise the Queen to shed innocent blood. It is an
affair of importance. Let us discuss the matter gravely,
what is their guilt?” The officer replied, ‘They pray to
many gods, to Jehovah, to Jesus,.to Christ, &c.”” The
other replied, “‘ But are not these perhaps different names
for one god? just as it is with us, we pray to Andriama-
nitra, Zanahary, Andriananahary, and Tompo ny ny aina,
&c.” The other officer could only answer that “‘ The
Queen has forbidden any to pray to Jehovah, and they
have done it, and having thus despised the command of
the Queen, they are guilty.”

The gevernment was a fortnight considering what
punishment to inflict upon the accused. On the four-
180 EXPECTATION OF

teenth day of their confinement, the people in the market
were summoned, and received a message from the Queen
to goand seize the property of Rafaravavy for themselves.
She herself knew nothing of the order having been given,
till some of the people came rushing into her house
almost out of breath, and, without ceremony, began at
once to seize and carry away whatever property they
could lay their hands on. In a few moments the house
was filled with people, and everything she possessed
was carried off, and the house itself pulled to pieces,
and its materials carried away. She was then ordered
to follow four of the Tsiarondahy, the class employed in
putting criminals to death. She asked where they were
going to take her? They replied, “The Queen knows
what to do with you. The way we go you are to follow.”
She obeyed the order, and followed. They took her along
the road in which criminals are usually conducted for
execution, at Ambohipotsy. She had then no expectation
of her life being spared, but concluded they had orders to
put her to death forthwith. The fear of death had how-
ever left her. Isaiah xli. 10, and xliii. 1 and 2, yielded
her much support. The prayer of Stephen, ‘“ Lord
Jesus receive my spirit,” was frequently repeated by her
on the way. She now says, in the recollection of that
eventful moment, that she felt as if she had done with
earth, and wished her spirit to be out of the body.

One young man, a beloved Christian, followed her up
to town, and when her conductors were turning to the
side path at Andohalo that leads to Ambohipotsy, she
had an opportunity of saying to him, privately, “Go _
with me, and see my end, and hear my last words; for if
SUFFERING DEATH. 181

I shall find by experience the strength of Christ sufficient
for my support, and am enabled to bear testimony to it,
in my last moments, as I have enjoyed it hitherto ; it may
tend to encourage our friends who may be called to follow
my steps.” He replied, “I shall not leave you, dear sister ;
go on, and cleave to Him on whom you have built your
hope.” A near relative and two other Christians followed
her, and gave her similar advice. One of them told her
before leaving the house, ‘“‘ Fear not, beloved sister ; though
there may be affliction here, there is rest in heaven.”
They presently left the path, and entered the house of a
Dekana of Rainiharo, where exceedingly heavy irons
were put on her.* One of the men present said to the
smith who was fastening them on, “Do not put them
too fast, it will be difficult to take them off; nor, indeed,
is it necessary, she is to be put to death to-morrow morn-
ing at cock-crow.”

It was afterwards found that the order had been issued
by the Queen to put her to death at the time mentioned,
before daylight, the next morning ;—a still and solemn
hour, often chosen for putting criminals to death. It oc-
curred, however, that that very night, during which our
friend Rafaravavy, with the feelings of a martyr, was
expecting death in a few hours,—that night a fire burst
out in the capital, burnt down many houses, and created
so much confusion, that the orders of the Queen were
left in abeyance for the time.

. The fire caused a good deal of remark at the capital ;
many who had some knowledge of the scriptures said it

* These irons are called “ Bérano maso,”’ signifying “many
tears.”
182 PRESERVATION.

seemed like a judgment from heaven for acting as they
had done with the people of God. The morning was
dark and cloudy ; mnumerable small sparks of fire came
over the court-yard, which created great terror in the
minds of those that saw them, and it is supposed had
some influence on the mind of the Queen, easily affected
by superstitious alarms, in saving the life of Rafaravavy.
The chief officer had given a general order to those under
him, on seeing the confusion occasioned by the fire, to
suspend for the present a// government service. This
was done without any reference to Rafaravavy. But the
executioners, who had received their orders previously
to put her to death, could not, or would not, execute the
sentence now until they received fresh instructions, and
so her life was saved on that occasion. One of the natives
afterwards remarked, “God is indeed the sovereign of life.
Twice has the Queen given orders to the executioners to
put Rafaravavy to death, but God has prevented it; at
first, he caused them to delay the execution, by the fire
that burnt down part of the town, and at another time,
by causing her to know the design of the Queen in time
to effect her escape; and yet I never knew,” said the
native making the observation, “a single instance besides,
in which execution has been delayed beyond the time
fixed on by the Queen, when once the executioner had
received his orders.”

The day Rafaravavy was taken up to town, with the
expectation of being put to death, the other Christian
prisoners were taken to Ambatonafandrana, and divided
among the officers. Eleven of them were taken to the house
-of one of the Dekanas of Rainiharo. Soldiers guarded
STUBBORNNESS. 183

them night and day. Paul was put in a separate house,
and placed in irons, and was kept so for a month, as they
considered him and Rafaravavy the leaders of the little
band. His life was in great danger, and he had himself
little hope of being spared. The officers frequently said,
* Do you see that foolish old man? he is the leader of
these young people. They would have never so daringly
opposed the words of the Queen, had they net been urged
on by some one like this man.”

The chief officers and judges, and many of the people,
were collected at Ambatonafandrana to hear the message
of the Queen, which was delivered by Raimbozaka,
Rajery, and Rabehaja, and which was as follows :—“ It is
announced to you, O people,” saith the Queen, “these are
stubborn persons persisting in doing what is forbidden,
and the punishment of their own deeds is inflicted upon
them.* This I have decided to do with them: I will re-
duce them to perpetual slavery, so that their friends shall
never be allowed to redeem them ; they shall die in slavery;
they have paid no regard to my commands, and have
attempted to disannul my established law given you a
Imahamasina. I tell you this that you may all hear what
they have done ; and I announce to the public that I asked
them till I was tired, to tell me their leaders and their
comrades, and the houses where they met to pray; they
have refused to tell me, for their comrades are dearer to
them than I am, and therefore, though I have decided to

* « Stubborn,” or obstinate. ‘Of this I had no doubt,” said
Pliny, in his letter to the Emperor Trajan, “‘ whatever was the
nature of their religion, that a sullen and inflexible obstinacy
called for the vengeance of the magistrate.”
184 RASALAMA

inflict this punishment upon them for their transgression,
yet if I find out at some future time that they have
companions, and that they have assembled in private
houses, I will put them to death whenever they are ac-
cused. And are you not grieved, O people, that they pay
more regard to the white people the other side the
water than to my words, for they consider my words as
nothing, though they are natives of this country.” The
people replied: ‘“ As to this people, it is not you, Madam,
but we who are grieved ; may you reach to an old age,
not suffering affliction. Madam, you have now decided
what punishment to inflict upon them; as for us, we
would say, let them all be put to death, for what loss
would it be to Imerina? they are not so many as to be
equivalent to those born in a single night!”

Rasalama was among the ten confined in the house
of Ramiandravola, a Dekana of Rainiharo, a man pro-
verbially savage and cruel. A relation of hers told
her she was astonished that she had accused her
brethren and sisters, since nothing had been previously
known to the government respecting Paul, Simeon,
Andrianantoandro, Andrianimanana, Ramanana, Raivo,
and Raminahy, till she had disclosed their names. She
was deeply grieved when she heard this, as it showed
she had been most unintentionally the cause of betraying
her friends. She was overheard, during the time she
was under confinement, to express her astonishment that
the people of God should be treated in such a manner.
“Men,” said she, “that have neither excited rebellion,
nor stolen the property of any, nor spoken ill of any, yet
all their property is confiscated, and they themselves re-
ACCUSED. 185

duced to perpetual slavery: I would advise the perse-
cutors to think a little of what they are doing, lest they
bring on themselves the wrath of God. When the Tsitia-
laingia came to my house,” she added, with extraordinary
warmth of feeling, “ I was not afraid, but rather rejoiced
that I was counted worthy to suffer affliction for believing
in Jesus; I had hope of the life in heaven.” The wife
of Ramiandravola, her master, heard the remarks and
told her husband, who immediately communicated it to
Rainiharo. The latter praised him for his fidelity and
diligence, and ordered him to put heavy irons on
Rasalama. A messenger was also sent to acquaint the
judges with what she had said.

On the return of the messenger, she inquired of him
what message he had taken. ‘“ Only your words,” said
he, “that you rejoiced when you saw the Tsitialaingia
come to you.” “Why,” rejoined Rasalama, “ when
I said much did you report little? The net is spread,
but the bird may escape. It was I,” added she, “ that
gave the names of Raintsiheva and others as our asso-
ciates, that it might be for their honour and happiness.
No one else raised them to honour, and I did.” She was
now put in heavy irons and beaten, but continued singing
hymns. ‘“ My life,” said she, “shall go for my com-
panions. You say Rafaravavy will be put to death; but
no, she will not die, I shall be killed instead of her!”
Such a spirit and such remarks in Madagascar were suf-
ficient to lead to her condemnation and death.

Such was her excitement of mind amidst an enfeebled
state of body produced by severe beating and excruci-
ating pain, that she perhaps said some few things unad-
186 RASALAMA’S

visedly, and led some of her friends to think that for a
day or two there was a slight degree of incoherence about
her. But she was perfectly calm and tranquil before
death.

Ramiandravola had said to her, when the heavy irons
were ordered to be placed on her, “I know you are a
relative of mine, and that we share the same family grave,
still, if, you are found doing what the Queen condemns, I
renounce all acquaintance with you. I have nothing
whatever to dread but Ranavalona the Queen, and Raini-
haro; what they love I love, what is sweet to them is
sweet to me, and although a dog should be cut to pieces
over my head,* if that would please them, it would please
me.” “That is a strong expression to use,” said Rasa-
lama, “‘and ought to awaken some reflection; you say
you would delight to submit to the greatest possible in-
dignity, even that a dog should be cut to pieces over you,
if the Queen desired it—and all this out of love to the
sovereign. That devotion to the Queen ought to make
you reflect a little”—meaning, if so much is due to an
earthly sovereign, is no obedience to be paid to the au-
thority of the Supreme Lord of all?—should not his
servants be willing to suffer in his cause and cheerfally
endure all that he may impose on them?

Many of the people attributed her firmness, and the
remarks she continued to make, to the influence of some
secret witchcraft which they believed had been employed
over her by means of the missionaries. ,“ Dreadfully

* A common practice in cases of persons put to death on any
charge of sorcery, and a mark of extreme contempt and abhor-
rence.
CONDEMNATION. 187

powerful indeed,” said they, ‘must those (‘ody’)
charms be, which can induce her to keep on talking in
this way even to the very last!”

She was now taken from the house of Ramiandravola,
and ordered for execution the next morning. She was put
‘that afternoon into irons of a peculiar construction, not
intended #0 much for the security of the prisoner as for
crue] punishment. The irons consist of rings and bars,
‘and are so fastened around the feet, hands, knees, and
‘neck, as to confine the whole body in an excruciatingly
painful position, forcing the extremities together, as if the
sufferer were packed into a small case. These irons are
called “ omby fohy,” “ the shortened bullock,” from the
mode in which the natives are accustomed to tie the animal
‘by drawing the fore and hind feet together in one knot.

Being led to the place of execution next morning, she
expressed her joy that she had received the knowledge of
the truth, and continued singing hymns on the way.
Passing by Mr. Griffiths’ chapel, where she had been
baptized, she exclaimed, “‘ There J heard the words of
the Saviour!” On reaching the fatal spot, she requested
permission to kneel down and pray; her request was
granted ; she calmly knelt down, committed her spirit
into the hands of the Redeemer, and in that attitude was
speared to death, the executioners, three or four m num-
ber, standing behind and by the side of her, and striking
her through the ribs and the heart.* The pain would be
momentary, the release triumphant, and the’ bliss that
followed immortal. Her body was left to be devoured
by the wild dogs that frequent all places in Madagascar

* See the vignette, title-page.
188 MARTYRDOM.

where criminals suffer. "When Rafaravavy and a friend
went some time afterwards to the exact spot where she
was killed, they could find only a few bones lying about,
where they had been scattered by the dogs.

The name “ Rasalama” is formed of the well-known
oriental word “Salama,” “ peace,” “health,” ‘ hap-
piness,” and the usual Malagasy affix to proper names,
“Ra.” Though a sufferer and a martyr, she realized
all that the name imported. She found “‘peace in be-
lieving.” She was sustained by the smiles of the Sa-
viour, and enjoyed the fulfilment of his promise, “ In
me ye shall have peace.”

Some said, when she was led forth to death, ‘‘ Where
is the God she prays to, that he does not save her now ?”’
Others were touched with pity, and could not see for
what crime these Christians were put to death.

He who enrolled with honour the name of Antipas as
his “faithful martyr” at Pergamos, has, in his pro-
vidence, now enrolled the name of “ Rasalama” as the
proto-martyr of Madagascar; and long will that name
continue embalmed with fragrancy in the memory of
those who love the Saviour’s cause.

Few of the Christians, if any, except one young man
named Rafaralahy, ventured to the spot while she was put
todeath. He did, and was deeply affected with the scene.
He sew her calmness, and returned from the spectacle a
martyr in spirit. “If,” said he, “I might die so tran-
quil and happy a death, I would not be unwilling to die
for the Saviour too.” The event will show that he was
ere long put to the awful test.
SLAVERY. 189

CHAPTER VIII.

From the Martyrdom of Rasalama, 1837, to that of Rafaralahy,
in 1838.

Axour a week after Rasalama’s death, the rest of the
accused party were divided as slaves among the first
officers ; Rainiharo took Andrianantoandro and his wife
and child, Ramanana, Ratiasoa, Ranomé, Ratsarahomba
(David), Andrianimanana, and Simeon ; Rainingitabe took
Raminahy; Andriantsalama had Raivo and Rafara ;
Ratsimanisa had Razafy and Razafitsara. Paul remained
still in irons, and two soldiers were guarding him, and
although Razafy, Paul’s wife, had not been accused, but
was reduced to slavery because she was the wife of one
deemed guilty, she was treated by Ratsimanisa as one of
the party. When her master was asked why she was put
in irons, since her husband only had been found guilty,
“Oh,” said he, with a sneer, “her very appearance tells
us she is one of them.” That she really was there can
be no question, but she had escaped the notice of the ac-
cuser in the first instance, and the evidence appealed to,
that her dejected looks were against her, would not quite
have satisfied a lover of impartial justice.

Rasoamaka (Joseph) and Ramanisa reached the capital
on their return home from Tamatave in a few days after
the above mentioned division of the Christians among the
officers had taken place. They heard of this fresh burst
of persecution while on their way up from the coast, when
about forty miles from home. They heard also that
190 WARRANT OF

their own names had been given in amongst their friends
as guilty. They hesitated whether to attempt effecting
their escape, or to proceed home and surrender themselves
to the government, and bear the persecution in common
with their friends. After much deliberation and prayer,
they came to the decision that it was their duty to proceed
home and impeach themselves to the government, for
“ God,” said they, “may make us useful to some of our
fellow slaves; perhaps we may be instruments in bringing
some of them to Jesus; there is every probability that
our lives will be spared, though we may suffer perpetual
slavery; and perhaps these afflictions are among the
things which God has appointed to make us fit for heaven !””
They arrived among their friends on the 13th of August,
and on the 15th were apprehended by the Vadintany and
the Dekana of the first officers.

There is somewhat curious in the native mode of pro-
ceeding in such cases. The following is introduced as an
illustration of the manner of apprehending a prisoner and
serving a warrant of distress. On entering the house of
Rasoamaka (Joseph), the officer of justice, addressing him,
said, “‘ May we be excused by the ground under our feet,
and the village within which we stand, and all the roofs
of the houses around us. May we be excused by the
father and mother, and by all the relations of the party
who are not guilty ; to you all we have no message; our
business is with you alone, Rasoamaka, for it is said you
still keep the book and make prayers, which ‘I do not
suffer to be done in my country,’ says the Queen, ‘ and
which I have prohibited and made a law against.” The
people, moreover, paid a bullock and a dollar as a fine for
APPREHENSION, 191

what they had done, and as a pledge that such a thing
should not be done again; and now there are some so
daring as to throw down the orim-bato* (fixed stone)
raised up at thattime. ‘I detest that,’ says the Queen ; ‘and
whoever is born even of parents that have done good in
my kingdom, or are even nearly related to me, if they
tranegress my laws, I detest their deeds,’ saith the Queen,
‘for they seek that which desecrates me; they are like
those who destroy the nest of the takatra,t and thereby
are seized with leprosy. I,’ saith the Queen, ‘am the just
balance, and will equalize Imerina: the way the hands go,
shall the feet follow; let his wife and children be sold,
and everything in and out of the house belonging to Ra-
soamaka, even to a white bead, or a piece of black cord,
let all be confiscated, and let his relations be careful that
they do not claim anything of his property. We advise
you to admonish your son to conceal nothing from the
Queen. He is young and may be tempted to conceal part
of his property ; be careful to keep nothing of his with
you; if discovered, all your property will be confiscated
just as his, says the Queen.’ ”

In a few days after the property had been confiscated,
Joseph and Ramanisa, and their wives, were taken to
Ambatonafandrana to be valued; their wives were re-
deemable, but they were not. The men were valued at
seven dollars each, the wives at sixteen each. The dis-
proportion was in consequence of the officers having to
pay for the men, while the relations had to pay for the

* A figurative expression to denote transgressing the esta-
plished law.
+ A native bird.
192 CHRISTIAN SLAVES.

women, if they redeemed them, which it was very pro-
bable they would. A portion of the money goes to the
Queen, a portion to the judges, officers, vadintany, and
accusers. The portion adjudged to the woman who had
accused them at first, and who induced the man to unite
with her im the accusation, was but six dollars in all,
though she had expected much more. According to the
customs of the country, there is a portion of such money
usually divided among those who are eye-witnesses of such
proceedings ; and generally there are many beggars asking
a trifle; but, as was remarked by one who saw and knew
this case well, though it is always difficult to supply even
the tenth part of the beggars with the smallest pieces of
money, none came to ask on this occasion, nor even ven-
tured near the place where the money was divided, ex-
cepting a few of the most worthless in the community.
About a fortnight after this, Paul was released from his
irons, and taken by Rainiharo, the chief officer, into his
service, to be employed along with those of the party whom
he had already taken. There were now five Christians
working together as slaves in the same field, and were at
first treated with much cruelty. After working hard all
day, they were put in heavy irons for the night. Paul,
though extremely weak in body, completed his daily labour
in the same manner as the rest, and contributed not a
little to support and comfort his four brethren, com-
panions in tribulation. He frequently repeated to them
the Forty-sixth Psalm, which he had committed to
memory. Two houses were appointed between them,
without other inmates, for their residence, in the village
near which they worked, and this gave them an oppor-
NO LENIENCY. 193

tunity of meeting at midnight for prayer and reading the
scriptures. Paul had a small copy of the Psalter with
him, another had a copy of Dr. Russell’s Catechism, and
the others had a copy each of the tract on the Resurrec-
tion. The weekly portion of rice given them by their
owner was small, not, indeed, more than sufficient for two
days ; and had it not been for the liberality of their Chris-
tian friends, they would have been nearly starved to death.
These did all they could to alleviate their sorrows and to
supply their wants.

Joseph and Ramanisa were also given to Rainiharo,
but he transferred them to Ramiandravola, the favourite
dekana already mentioned, and to whom he seems to
have been attached for his sternness and strictness with
those under him. This man treated them with the utmost
severity. The evening they went to him he called them
to his house, and told them they were now his slaves, and
that he wished to know whether they desired to remain
with him and do the work assigned them, or whether
they would prefer being sold in the market to another
master. “I do not wish to deceive you,” said he, “the
work here with me is very hard, and I do not play with
my slaves; if floggig and cruel treatment alone will
compel them to do their work, I shall not neglect these
means. However, I give you your choice, whether to
remain with me or to be sold in the market to-morrow.
I warn you not to expect to be sold to any of your friends,
by whom you may be treated kindly and not compelled to
labour, as other slaves. Were you sold in the markets
twenty times, it can only be to those who will promise to
make you work to the utmost of your power. You have

K
194 NO CHOICE.

transgressed the law of the Queen, and have deserved to
be put to death, and would have been eaten up by the
dogs before this, had the Queen not been a mercifal
sovereign. A proclamation is, therefore, made im all the
markets that you are guilty, and that you are condemned
to slavery and to hard labour as long as you live. As for
any hope of running away, it is out of your power; to
what part of the island could you ron where you would not
be caught? You see that those who were born in the
farthest parts of the island are caught and brought up here
to be sold. How, then, could you entertain any hope of
making your escape ?””

His aim in giving them this choice was to find some
occasion to give them a severe flogging at once, for had
they said they preferred to be sold rather than remain
with him, they would have been immediately flogged.
He had no authority to sell them ; they were only given
him for a time by Rainiharo, and that, because the latter
knew that he was a fit instrument to render the lives
of these young men as bitter as possible. The two Chris-
tians, being aware of his design, replied in the following
manner :—‘‘ May the Queen long live; may you, sir,
advance in honour. As for any hope of running away, we
can have none; for where could we run, and the govern-
ment not find us? If we had any intention of running
away, it is not likely we should have returned home of our

own accord from the coast, and given ourselves up to the |

‘government. And as to our choosing whom we shall
serve, we have no choice in that affair; but we are bound
to serve that master to whom we are given by the go-
vernment, and we hope you will not find us idle in your
SEVERITY, 195

service, nor unworthy of your confidence.” He then
sent them to work in his rice ground at his country village.
After working there a few weeks, he found that, so far
from being idle, they were completing their task even
before his other servants, and accordingly he made them
the overseers of all his slaves, with the hope of finding
some occasion to flog them, which he seemed very anxious
todo. Severity, he knew, would gratify Rainiharo and the
queen, but he did not like to use it without some excuse.
He now found what he wished, for when any of his slaves
neglected their work, he would not punish them, but the
overseers, saying, “‘ You are the responsible party, and it is
owing to your mildness and want of severity that the work
is not done. Do you not know that the queen and Rain-
tharo do not approve of the officers and overseers being 80
mild? I will show you how to treat those placed under
you. Do with them in this manner,”-—and with the ex-
pression, he flogged them till the whip cut into the flesh.
While flogging one of them, on one occasion, a severe
pain suddenly seized his hand and his side, which con-
tinued for some weeks. He attributed the pain to some
powerful “ody,” or charm, which the young man, he
‘supposed, had obtained from the missionaries. This pain
‘prevented his attendance on business, and he removed, pri-
vately, and in the night, by order of the divination. Shortly
after coming to his village, the rainy season commenced,
attended with thunder. As the houses are frequently
struck with lightning, he fancied himself not altogether
secure from danger, and accordingly called for his sword
and placed it before him, supposing that the thunder-bolt.
would be afraid to approach it. It so happened, however,
K2
196 SWORD, Versus LIGHTNING.

that almost as soon as the sword was placed on the spot,
the house was struck by the electric fluid, and he himself,
though not seriously injured, was struck down and re-
mained insensible for some time. The next day he called
Joseph to him, and ordered him to go to the market to
purchase some meat, as some of his friends were coming
to congratulate him on the narrow escape he had had the
evening before. He charged Joseph to buy the meat, but
to send it home by another slave, whom he was to find
in the market. Joseph went, made the purchase, and
searched in vain for the slave who was to carry it home ;
‘and at last, not finding him, took it home himself, lest his
master and his guests should be disappointed, and then
the vengeance should fall upon him. He, therefore, ran
home with it with great speed, but instead of being com-
mended by his master for his attention, was asked, with
an angry tone, why he had not sent the meat by the
slave, as he had been ordered? Joseph told him the
simple fact of the case. ‘‘ Now,” said “his master, “I
plainly see that you are a sorcerer, as I suspected. You
have sought to kill me. When I flogged Ramanisa the
other day, I was taken ill immediately; and when you
failed to destroy me at that time by your sorcery, you used
your charms to draw down the thunderbolt, and had I
not been of ‘ good fate’ (tsara vintana), I should then
have been killed. After failing in that attempt, you now
devise to put your charms into my meat to destroy me,”
—and taking hold of a piece of cord, he tied him up and
flogged him most severely. The officer’s mother who
stood by felt for the sufferer, and begged her son to cease,
and at last took him by his arm ; the enraged son struck
TANGENA. 197

the old woman down to the ground, by which a severe
wound was inflicted on her forehead. His wife then
interfered, but was treated in the same manner as the
mother, and one of her fingers was put out of joint. Their
interference, in fact, rather increased than alleviated
Joseph’s punishment.

He then asked permission of Rainiharo to administer
to both the young men the ordeal of tangena, but was re-
fused on the ground that they were still his (Rainiharo’s)
servants; and they were thus exempted from an ordeal
which, at the instigation of such a monster, and under
such circumstances, would no doubt have been so ad-
ministered as to prove necessarily fatal.

_ After David and Simeon had been working at Raini-
haro’s rice-ground for three months, they were removed
by him and appointed to attend upon his son; but as he
could not think of placing any one with the youth unleas
he had been proved free from witchcraft by the tangena,
they were both summoned to undergo the test. They
were asked, as a matter of form, whether they would
prefer being sold far away from home, or taking the
tangena. They replied that if their master were in earnest
in offering them an option in the case, they would far
rather be sold into any part of the country than take the
ordeal. The servant who had the command over them

said, “If that be your choice, I fear you are guilty. Why

should an innocent person dread the test?’ Nor durst
they venture to explain their real reason for wishing to
be exempted from it.

The mpanozondoha, or administrator, arrived at the
village early in the morning. Simeon and David were
198 TANGENA GIVEN TO SIMEON AND DAVID."

now separated and placed in different houses. A quantity
of boiled rice was given to each, then the three pieces of
the skin of a fowl to be swallowed, and a further spoonful.
of rice.. The tangena was then prepared by a little of.
the nut being scraped into some juice of a banana; and
the administrator commenced denouncing his curses,
calling upon the tangena to kill the victim if he were
guilty of witchcraft, or possessed any ody, charms, &c., and
at last gave him the poisonous cup to drink. He then
placed his hands upon their heads and begun repeating
the usual formula of curses. A very brief form was re-
peated over Simeon, and copious draughts of warm water
having been given him and produced their effect, he was
speedily pronounced innocent. A long time was occu-
pied in denouncing the curses on David, after the skin
had been swallowed, and before the tepid draught was
given. He drank upwards of four or five gallons of
water, and was occupied above six hours in this part of
the ceremony; but without the due effect.* His strength
began to fail him, and excruciating pains came over him.
He thought death was at hand, and inwardly cried to.
God to receive his departing spirit. Several of his friends
came to bid him farewell. The man who had charge of
them was about sending to Rainiharo to say that David
was proved guilty, but the servant by whom he intended

* It is affirmed by some, that if the administrator wishes the
party to be found innocent, he abbreviates the formulary of
curses, so that the water may be given as soon as possible.
During delay in other cases, it may be that the process of di-
gestion commences, and the ejection of the bits of skin becomes
the more difficult or impracticable. This opens the whole pro-
cess to bribery and partiality.,
RAFARAVAVY IN IRONS. 199

to send the message had already set out, and this circum-
stance saved his life at the time.

During the night some of his friends prevailed on the
person in charge ef David to allow him a second trial,
before sending word to his master that he was guilty.
This was done two days afterwards, when the process was
speedily completed, and he was pronounced innocent,
His health, however, was much affected. He remained
enfeebled several months, and his sight was impaired ;
nor has he even yet entirely recovered from the effects of
so fearful. an ordeal.

Rafaravavy was still in heavy irons, guarded by five
soldiers night and day, and every moment expecting to
hear the footsteps of the executioners. . On one occasion
she felt assured the hour of her departure had arrived ;,
one of the five soldiers, who was in the habit of frequently-
running from his post, to the great dissatisfaction of his
companions, came almost out of breath to the house where
she was confined, and told her there was some person to
be put to death that day, for the people were now boiling
water at Ambohipotsy. She inquired who he thought it
was, and he told her that though he did not know, the
people said it must be herself. In the course of a few
minutes it happened that four of the Tsiarondahy, already
mentioned as the class employed in executing criminals,
came to see that the guard were on duty. The guards
themselves had now no doubt they were coming for her,
and began to prepare to take off her irons, &c. She
commended herself to the Redeemer, and thought that in
a short time her sufferings would terminate, and she should
be present with the Lord. The promise in Isaiah came
200 CASE HOPELESS.

to her mind, “ Fear not, I am with thee,” &c., and she
felt no fear at the time. The event proved, however, that
it was another party about to be put to death ; and it was
by mere accident that the four Tsiarondahy came at that
moment.

Her Christian friends did all they could during the
whole time of her confinement to alleviate her sufferings,
by visiting her as often as they durst, and especially Joseph,
Paul, Ramanisa, and Rafaralahy, who proved to be the next
martyr. They took with them a Bible, or Testament, or
Tract, and as the guards, perhaps, supposed them to be
her relations, they would remain outside the house for an
hour or two and allow them to remain with her. Their
lamba, or long native robe, was very convenient for con-
cealing any book they happened to have, and which they
managed to read in a low tone, so that strangers could
scarcely discover what they were doing, but would be
rather led to conclude they were hanging their heads down
with grief on account of their suffering friend. To find
her sustaining her afflictions so cheerfully, contributed
not a little to encourage them. She remained in irons
upwards of five months. Her father and relations (ex-
cept those of them who were Christians) seldom came
near her. Her father, though extremely fond of her, and
aman of great influence with the three head officers, was
convinced he could do nothing for her, and therefore gave
up the case as hopeless. It is generally believed that the
regard which those three officers entertained for him had
hitherto saved her life. During this time she had op-
portunities of speaking.to many of her visitors respecting
the love of the Saviour. She had a long conversation on
CONVERSATION. 201

one occasion with a woman high in rank and influence,
who commenced the conversation by advising her to act
the part of a wise woman, and not be so foolish again,
since the queen had no wish to put her to death unless
she persevered in this folly. Rafaravavy replied; ‘Yes,
I would willingly leave all my folly; this imprisonmen:
and these afflictions are warnings to me, and if I still re-
main unwise I am wretched indeed. The Lord has been
very merciful to me and not destroyed me in my sin.”
The conversation was sustained for some time in an ob-
scure kind of way, for Rafaravavy by using the native
word ny tompo, which literally means lord, sovereign,
master, (and by which she intended the Lord, Jehovah,)
her visitor supposed her to mean only the queen. She
then told her in plain language, and her friend understood
it, and could not object to praying to God, but thought,
as the queen had forbidden it, they should do it so
secretly as not to be found out.

One of her guards asked her one day, “ What is it you
were taken up for?” ‘For religious worship.” ‘‘ What
did you say when you were first taken up? did you
confess’ your crime or did you deny it?” ‘ How could
I deny a thing that I had done?” said she. ‘ And are
you not sorry now that you have brought such trouble on
yourself?” ‘How can I be sorry for praying for the
pardon of my sins,” replied Rafaravavy, “and asking
God to bless me and make me for ever happy? are not
all men seeking for happiness and riches in the way in
which they think they can obtain them? so do I by
praying to God: I seek them according to the word of
God, for this alone teaches us how to obtain blessings.”

, Kk 3
202 HOPEFUL CONVERSATION.

‘¢ That,” said he, “is true; I read a little of it before
the queen suppressed it, and had she not suppressed.
it, nearly all the people would. have received it by this
time. I remember reading, ‘Then shall the dust return
ta the earth as it was, and the spirit unto God that gave.
it.’”? Eccles. xii. 7. Rafaravavy gave him a history of
the creation of man, his happiness while innocent, his fall,,
and particularly his recovery through Christ. This made.
a deep impression on his mind. He left her, saying,
‘** May God bless you and release you from this confine-
ment so that I may visit you and hear more of this de-
lightful truth.” ‘I am delighted,” said she, “to hear
you say so, and to find you willing to listen to these
truths, and desirous of an interest in them. I shall re-
joice to tell you all I know concerning them; I firmly
believe there is a world after this, and if I did not, I
should be the most miserable of beings. It is this which
enables me to bear all these afflictions with cheerfulness.
My father and mother, and relations, as you know, have
forsaken me, but I have a Father in heaven who can
make up the loss.”

About the expiration of the five months during which
she had now been confined, the season of the great festival
on the commemoration of the new year arrived, and as she
had been kept all this time in the residence of a dekana of
Rainiharo, he petitioned to have her removed to some
other house during the festivities. Rainiharo told the
queen, and in a few days an order was given to take her
to Ambatonafandrana, and sell her into perpetual slavery,
as the rest had been. She was actually taken to the
market, but no one was allowed to buy her excepting
ANOTHER MARTYRDOM. 203

Rainiharo. She was taken there merely as a mark of
public disgrace. Rainiharo transferred her to his first
dekana, Andrianandraina, whose wife was a distant re-
lation of hers, though her enemies did not think of this
at the time. Her new master treated her kindly, and
gave her liberty to go and come as she pleased, provided
she punctually finished her work. During this time she
was much in the company of her beloved husband, a
colonel in the army, who, having heard of her condition,
had obtained permission to visit the capital for a few
months from his station on the western coast.

During the time she had been closely guarded, the
other Christians reduced to slavery had been in the habit
of meeting for prayer and religious conversation at the
house of a young man named Rafaralahy, who had built
a house far the purpose at a short distance from the
village where he resided, and here they often forgot their
afflictions in holding communion with God. Rafaravavy,
after being released, soon found out the little band, and
united herself with them. She attended three meetings
in Rafaralahy’s house. After this they were discovered,
Rafaralahy was put to death, and all who had met in
his house for religious purposes were taken up, so far as
they could be found.

Rafaralaby was a young man brought up in good cir-
cumstances. His parents possessed considerable property,
vice grounds, &c. His father died when he was not more
than twenty-eight or thirty years of age. He lived about
two miles from the capital, where, in the year 1831, re-
ligious instruction was conveyed to the inhabitants by a
native who came originally from the same village. Ra-
204 RAFARALAHY.—RAFARALAHY’S BROTHER.

faralahy opened his house for religious services, learnt to
read, and continued to attend the preaching and other
means of instruction, till the suppression in 1835. He
did not make the same rapid progress in the knowledge
of the Scriptures that many of the other converts in Ma-
dagascar did. He, however, taught several to read, and
induced some to attend chapel on the Sabbath. According
to his own testimony he intended, when the queen issued
her edict against Christianity, to yield submission to her
commands; gave up his books, and commenced selling
on the Sabbath day. He continued to do so for seven
successive sabbaths, at the end of which it happened that
just that number of large and painful boils broke out on
his body, and as the number of the boils and of the Sab-
baths corresponded, his conscience led him to suspect that
the former were inflicted on him for having broken the
Sabbath. This created a good deal of uneasiness in his
mind for some time.

Towards the close of the year 1835 his only brother,
who had adopted him as his own child, became very de-
sirous of being admitted to the court-yard, urging his
claim to the privilege as a sort of inheritance from his

‘father. The queen intimated that she could not admit
any one to her presence who had not been proved inno-
cent of witchcraft by the tangena, and as he had not
undergone the test, it would be better for him to remain
quietly where he was, serving the government in the
situation he then held. He, however, supposing that ad-
mission to the royal presence was well worth the risk of
the ordeal, sent a request to the queen that she would
direct that it might be administered to him. This was
ANXIETY FOR A MOTHER. 205

all done against the earnest entreaties of Rafaralahy.
She consented, the tangena was administered, and he was
convicted by it as guilty of witchcraft. He begged the
queen to give him another trial, which she refused to do,
though, owing to her regard for his father’s memory, she
spared his life, and banished him to some part of the
Sakalava country to remain till death. The whole of his
property was confiscated. As Refaralahy was much
attached to him, this calamity, which he had brought
upon himself, made a deep impression on his mind, con-
vinced him more than ever of the vanity of earthly things,
the uncertainty of life, and the supreme importance of
being prepared to meet God.

Soon after this he visited one of the missionaries, and
asked for a copy of the Psalter. A copy of the New Tes-
tament was offered him, but he was too timid at that
time to accept of it, thinking he could more easily conceal
a small psalter than a large book. In a few weeks, how-
ever, he applied for the Testament and some spelling
books, in order to teach others. He now gave himself up
unreservedly to the Lord. He taught several of his
servants to read, and instructed them in the way of sal-
vation, and had the great delight of seeing four or five of
his dearest friends become the followers of the Saviour.
He was very anxious to see his beloved mother become a
Christian, and neglected no means to instruct her. He
prayed most fervently for her, and repeatedly requested
his Christian friends to remember his mother in their
prayers. She never opposed his embracing Christianity
nor advised him to relinquish it; neither did she pre-
vent his associating with the poor and afflicted Christians,
206 CHRISTIAN KINDNESS.

but frequently admonished him not to admit too many to.
his house at one time. She gave, however, no evidence .
of conversion to God.

He told the missionary from whom he obtained the
copies of the Scriptures above mentioned, that although
he had been in the habit of attending religious ordinances
for some years, and had associated much with professed.
Christians, and had felt some pleasure at times in reli~
gious conversation, yet he did not think thata real change:
of heart had taken place, until some months after the
queen’s edict for the suppression of Christianity, for then
he began to feel a delight in spiritual things, and to find
it good to draw near to God in private devotion. Some
of the Christians, however, who knew him intimately,
think that he was, a true convert previously to that time.

Rafaralahy omitted nothing in his power to alleviate
the sorrows of his persecuted brethren. He either visited
them himself, or sent a. trusty servant frequently to in-
quire how they fared, and when he found any of them in
want.of food, he usually supplied them according to his
ability. He had divided his rice ground, allotting a por-
tion of it for the support of himself and family, and an-
other portion for his poor relatives and neighbours; but
in the spirit of the primitive disciples, he devoted the
greatest portion to the relief of his afflicted brethren.
He kept nothing for himself, more than was absolutely
necessary, often. telling the Christians, that he felt less.
and less desire to accumulate riches on earth, but an in-
creasing desire to secure a treasure in heaven, and would.
often quote such passages as the following: “ We brought
nothing into this world, and it is certain we can carry
SPIRITUAL PROVISION. 207

nothing out.” “If we have food and raiment, let us
therewith be content.” ‘I feel,’ said he, ‘no wish to be
rich, but I am thankful to have a little more than I want
for my own use, that I may assist my beloved friends,
who have lost all for Christ’s sake and are now in bondage.”
He often remarked to his Christian friends, that he could
not feel satisfied with merely supplying them with the
food that perisheth, unless he did all he could to supply
them with spiritual food, knowing they could not be
happy in their present condition, unless their souls were
nourished with the heavenly manna,

“Tf the body,” said he, “is not regularly fed, it be-
comes weak, feeble, and unable to bear the fatigue of hard
labour. So is it with the soul, it will become weak in
faith, hope, and love, if not regularly supplied with
spiritual food, and as those who are called to hard labour
are not satisfied with weak food, such as milk and eggs,
so neither let us be satisfied with spiritual mids, but let
us seek for stronger food, that we may be strong in the
Christian graces, for we know not what hardships await
us.” That he might be able to afford opportunities to his
Christian friends to meet together for prayer, reading the
scriptures and religious conversations, he removed from the
village mentioned to a private spot, where he could en-
‘tertain them without its being noticed by the villagers,
and his house became a home to the afflicted Christians
until his death.

He was not satisfied with doing good to his Christian
brethren ; he extended his benevolence to all around him.
He spoke of the love of Jesus to his neighbours as far as
he could, and was the instrument of inducing several to
208 LEPERS.

believe in the Saviour. He was particularly attentive in
this respect'to three lepers who had their hut a short
distance from his house. Those infected with this disease
are numerous in Madagascar, and as soon as it is dis-
covered, the leper is removed from all society, and is
placed at a distance from all other habitations, to remain
there until death. Their relations supply them from time
to time with provisions, placing it on the ground at a few
hundred yards distance from the hut, and calling to the
sick to fetch it. Rafaralahy felt much for the three that
remained near his house, and often said to his Christian
friends, “‘ How happy they might be in the prospect of
death if they knew the Saviour. How pleasantly and de-
lightfully they might spend their time together in reading
the Scriptures, and conversing on the love of Christ,
and uniting together in prayer and praise! They might
read, sing, and pray without any fear of being discovered ;
what a pity they had not learnt to read before they were
taken ill!” At last he determined on making an attempt
to teach them to read and instruct them in the way of
salvation. He went to them with a spelling book for
each, and told them the design of his visit; they accepted
his kind offer most gratefully, and immediately commenced
learning, and in a few weeks they were able to read the
New Testament tolerably well, a copy of which he pre-
sented to each of them. One of them happening to lose
his copy, the whole three went in search of it, and con-
tinued searching a whole day butin vain. They returned
to their humble shed and united in fervent prayer, that God,
from whom nothing is hid, would discover to them the
spot where their treasure was. After the prayer, they
ACCUSER OF THE BRETHREN. 209

again commenced searching, and happily soon found the
book. One of the three died'a few months before Rafa-
ralahy, in full assurance of hope. And there is ground
to believe that the others are true believers in Christ.
They were full of grief and sorrow when they heard of
the death of their kind benefactor. They entreated most
earnestly the first Christian they saw, after hearing of this
event, to continue to them the instructions which he had
imparted to them. He promised to do so, but in a few
hours after leaving them, found that he could but just
save his life by immediate flight. .

This fresh burst of persecution was occasioned by the
following circumstance. Rafiakarana, or, as sometimes
called, Ramahazo, was a native of the same village as
Rafaralahy. They were well acquainted with each other
from their childhood. The former was placed in the
mission school by Radama, he conducted himeelf well,
and made good progress. He was chosen to be one of
the printers, when the press was set up in Madagascar.
When permission was given by the queen to baptize and
admit the natives to the Lord’s Supper, he was among
the first to express a desire to receive these ordinances,
and was baptized. He appeared zealous in promoting
the spiritual welfare of his countrymen, and fixed on his
native village as the more immediate field of his labours.
‘He obtained a house in the village, went there on the
Sabbath, and sometimes on week evenings. Rafaralahy
attended his religious instructions, and received some
good impressions from them. The latter learnt to read
and made some progress in the knowledge of the Scrip-
tures. As the love of the Saviour increased in him, he
210 A BACKSLIDER.

became more decided and took a bolder part with the
Christians, and for the last year or two of his life, his
whole mind was turned to the relief of his brethren in
tribulation, and to promote the welfare of others. Rafia-
karana, on the suppression of Christianity, became one of
its greatest enemies, and attempted more than once to ac-
cuse the missionaries of printing things at the press which
the queen had made unlawful. He addicted himself to vicea
which brought on him a disease under which it is said he
labours, and probably will, to the end of life. Rafaralahy
feeling himself under great obligation to Rafiakarana
for the advice and religious knowledge which he had
formerly communicated to him, was much concerned
respecting his condition, and determined to converse with
him on the subject. He. put him in mind of his own
former advice, and endeavoured to impress on his mind
the awful situation in which he would be found if, after
teaching others, he himself should be found destitute of
the one thing needful. This seemed to have some effect,
he confessed his errors, but complained of poverty, and
urged that as a reason for acting the part he had done.
**T am obliged,” said he, “to be at my fanompoana from
morning till evening and receive nothing for my service;
yet I have a wife and children to support.” He requested
Rafaralahy to admit him into partnership with him in
trade as a huckster. Rafaralahy thought him sincere, re-
joiced that he had gained his brother, and received him
into partnership, on condition of not selling on the Sab-
bath. The new partner most willingly consented to this,
and pretended he was as anxious to keep the Sabbath as a
day of rest as Rafaralahy himself. They continued friendly
RENEWED CHARGE AGAINST THE CHRISTIANS. 211

for some weeks; Rafiakarana gained the confidence of
Rafaralahy, and the latter told him how the Christians
were still in the habit of meeting at his house, which he
had built at a distance from the village for their accom-
modation. They kept respectively a portion of the goods
on sale. Rafiakaraua lost a part of what was under his
care, or pretended he had. His companion of course
was obliged to bear part of the loss: and of what was
sold, Rafiakarana kept the money and spent it. He now
owed fifteen dollars to Rafaralahy, and when the latter
asked him for the, money, he hastened to Rainiharo, and
accused Rafaralahy of holding religious assemblies at his
house. “‘Itisthought,” said he, “that the Europeans have
gone home, but it appears their persons only are gone,
their spirit and customs still remain; there are religious
assemblies still held in Imerina.” ‘ Are you sure of what
you affirm ?”’ said Rainiharo, “so that I may tell the queen
of it, for when your statement is once before her, you
cannot withdraw it.” The accuser replied, “Do you
imagine, Sir, I would dare to mention it if I were not
sure? Are not you as the queen herself? Many of a
certain class (Tsimiamboholahy) assemble frequently at
Rafaralahy’s house, who has removed for that very pur-
pose out of the village to a private spot, and erected a
high wall around it, and a gate that no one might get in
and take them by surprise.” ‘If what you state is true,”
Rainiharo replied, “say who they are, that their names
may be taken to the queen.” He then mentioned Rafa-
ralahy, Ratsimindrana, Tsimosarena, Tsimanova, Tsin~
dramina, Ravahiny. All these were living in the family
of Rafaralahy, and in addition to these were discovered
212 A MARTYR’S CALMNESS.

Andriamadio, Rasata, Ramahazo, Rabodomanana, Ra-
laingomanga, Ratsaramiarana, and Andriantsalama.
. Rafaralahy was immediately seized and put in irons,
and every thing was done to extort the names of his com-
penions from him; but he remained inflexible, saying,
“ Here am I; let the queen do what she pleases with me ;
I have done it, but I will not accuse my friends.” After
being in irons for two or three days, he was taken to
Ambohipotsy, the place of execution, where he was
speared to death. The calmness and tranquillity with
which he met death made a deep impression on the minds
of the executioners. When they came to the door of the
house where he was bound, they asked, ‘‘ Which is Rafa-
ralahy?” He replied very calmly, “I am, Sir.” They.
approached him and took off the irons, and told him to
go along with them; he arose immediately, went with
them, speaking to them all the way of Jesus Christ, and
how happy he felt at the thought of shortly seeing Him
who had loved him and died for him. On arriving at
the place of execution, he requested them to allow him a
few moments to commit his soul to the Saviour ; this being
granted, he offered a most fervent prayer for his country,
for his persecuted brethren, and commended his soul to
his Saviour. He then rose from his knees, and the exe-
cutioners were preparing to throw him down on the
ground ; he said there was no need for that, as he was
now ready to die; he laid himself down, and was imme-
diately put to death. His friends were allowed to bury
the body in the grave of their ancestors.

After Rafaralahy’s death, his property was of course
confiscated. Rafiakarana put in a claim, insisted that
DISAPPOINTMENT. 213

Rafaralahy owed him a sum of money, and took pos-
session of the rice till the amount should be paid. This
led to an investigation of the affair, and it was proved
that Rafiakarana owed fifteen dollars to Rafaralahy ; and
had it not been for the influence he had with Rainiharo,
he would have been then reduced to slavery. A great por-
tion of his property was taken to pay the fifteen dollars ;
so that the accuser was, after all, greatly disappointed
and mortified in the business.

Not any of the persons above mentioned had been pre-
viously accused, ‘and this contributed to save them from
capital punishment. They were dealt with more leni-
ently than those who had been accused six months pre-
viously. Their friends were allowed to redeem them
from the nominal slavery to which they were reduced,
owing probably to their being Tsimiamboholahy, the
same clan as Rainiharo’s, and because there were among
them some of the best workmen in the government
musket manufactory at Ilafy. Besides this, the num-
ber of the accused was now so considerable, the govern-
ment seemed unwilling to reduce any more to perpetual
slavery; and it was thought that, as several among
those now accused had been accused once or twice
before, it would be sufficient to punish them capitally,
and that this would deter such as were accused for the
Jrrst time, from a second offence.

The first step taken by the government after the
death of Rafaralahy was the apprehension of his wife,
and another young Christian, Andriantsalama ; they were
confined together, flogged and threatened with cruelty,
unless they would tell the names of all who had been
214 INTIMATION OF DANGER.

in the habit of visiting Rafaralahy for religious pur-
poses. Fear at length compelled them, and though as
yet none of those who had been formerly accused had been
again accused, they were now. Among them were Rafa-
ravavy, Paul, Andrianantoandro, Andrianomanana, Jo-
seph, &c. Some of their friends at the capital, who were
anxiously on the watch, heard that the names of these
persons had been again given in to the queen, and as they
knew there could be no hope of their lives being saved
this time but by immediate flight, they immediately con-
veyed to them intelligence of the imminent danger to
which they were exposed.

The measures which they adopted in seeking safety
by flight, and the many providential interpositions by
which they were preserved, will be detailed in the fol-
lowing chapter.
ESCAPE FROM THE CAPITAL. 215

CHAPTER IX.

From the Martyrdom of Rafaralahy to the Escape of the
Christian Refugees from the Capital, on their way to Tama-
tave.

At the time the intelligence was sent to our friends
respecting the apprehension and execution of Rafaralahy,
it happened that Rafaravavy was at the house of a pious
friend, residing not far from the capital, and had with
her two Christian female companions. The three women
and the owner of the house were conversing together on
religious subjects, when, on a sudden, a servant entered
the house with a note for Rafaravavy, telling her that
Rafaralahy had been put to death, that-his wife and a
young friend were now in irons, and had been flogged, to
compel them to tell the names of all who had visited
Rafaralahy ; and that her name, and the names of the
two women then with her, had been disclosed. This
sudden intelligence somewhat alarmed her. Her friend
perceiving that there was something serious in the matter,
asked to know the coritents of the note. She told them
all. All were alarmed, and the owner of the house him~
self, though his name had not been mentioned, neither
had he attended any of the meetings at Rafaralahy’s
house. ‘ What is to be done?” said he; “you know
that I can do nothing for you: the last time you were
216 ESCAPE FROM THE CAPITAL.

accused you were scarcely saved, and you are sure to be
put to death now, if the information just received be
correct.” ‘We trust,’ said they, “ God will give us
strength to be faithful even to the end.”

After some consultation the three women determined
to go up to town, for Rafaravavy’s master lived at Am-
bohitsirohitra. They set out in company, and came
together until they reached the foot of Ambohipotsy,
talking together of the Saviour, and of the holy delight
they anticipated on seeing him for the first time in
heaven. Here they had to separate. Rafaravavy in-
tended to go straight to her master at Ambohitsirohitra.
She preferred being apprehended there and put to death,
rather than at her friend’s house, which was about two
miles south of the capital. Perhaps some kind Christian
friend, she thought, might be at hand to cast a friendly
look upon her there ; but at the other place no Christian
could be expected. The other two women were going
to the east side of the town, to a friend’s house. Before
they parted they knelt down together, and most affec-
tionately and fervently commended themselves and each
other to the care and protection of the Keeper of Israel ;
and then parted with the full hope of shortly meeting
together in heaven; for they had not, as yet, even the
most remote idea of making their escape. They felt as
if they had done with earth, and said to one another,
‘We have to walk from hence to town, thence to Ambo-
hipotsy, and there we shall say farewell to all below.”

The two women proceeded to the east side of the
town, and Rafaravavy proceeded west of Ambohijanahary
towards Ambohitsirohitra; and during the whole of the
RAFARAVAVY. 214

way she ceased not to pray fervently that God would give
her strength to lay down her life for his sake, if such
were his holy will. She reached Ambohitsirohitra, and
entered her master’s house, and fully expected to find
there the messengers of the queen already come to
apprehend her. On her arrival, however, she found
only one of her fellow-servants keeping the house. Her
master, his wife, and all the slaves, were gone to reap
in the rice-grounds. She asked her fellow-servant if
any one from the queen had been inquiring for her
master, and was answered in the negative. This satis-
fied her that the order to seize her had not been issued,
for they would not apprehend her without telling her
master first; and, as her master was gone to some dis-
tance, they could not have found him without first coming
to inquire at the house where he was. She felt uneasy,
and left the house with the intention of going up to town
to try and ascertain the state of the case. On her way,
she had to pass Simeon’s house, or, rather, that of his
wife ; and, on coming near, she saw David, and hesitated
whether to pass by or not, under an impression that her
being seen with them at the time might lead to the dis-
covery of more of the Christians than were yet known ;
for she was not aware that David and Simeon were
among the party accused. As soon as David and Simeon
saw her, they beckoned to her to come: she entered the
house, and heard a confirmation of the fact, that Rafa-
ralahy was put to death, and that his wife and Dekana
were seized, and that the names of many of the Chris-
tians had been extorted from them, and, among others,
their names : “and,” said the young men, “ we intended
L
218 DUTY TO ESCAPE.

tocome for you; others of us intended to go for Paul
and Andrianantoandro, and consult together, and pray
for direction that God would show us his will, and give
us strength to do it. You are come; let us go in, and
think well on the subject, and unite in prayer for
guidance.”

They did so; and, after much consideration, decided
that it was their duty to save their lives, if they could,
by running away, rather than give themselves up to the
government to be put to death. What David did when
Saul sought his life, and what the Saviour said to his
disciples, —“ If they persecute you in one city, flee to
another,’’—led them to this decision. Andrianimanana,
one of the twelve senior teachers, was with them. It
was now late, and they resolved to set out at midnight.
Rafaravavy went up to town to say farewell to a beloved
friend, and there met Joseph. They had sent to Paul
and Andrianantoandro, but, as they were residing at
some miles’ distance, the messenger did not find them,
or perhaps, in fact, fear kept him from even trying to
find them. The first part of the night was spent by
Simeon and David in arranging the money belonging to
Rainiharo, which they happened to have in their pos-
session; for, after they had been tried by the ordeal,
Rainiharo had given Simeon nineteen dollars, and David
ten, to trade with ;* and, as part of the money was still
due from the people, and part of the rest was in cloth on
sale, there was some difficulty in putting their master

* Tt is customary in Madagascar for masters to employ their

servants, t. e. slaves, as hawkers or pedlers, the latter receiving a
share of the profits arising from the sale of the goods.
HONESTY. 219

in possession of his property. They packed up the
cloth, and put the money they held inside, and a written
account with the names of those who had not paid,
leaving the bundle under suitable charge, and stating
that it belonged to Rainiharo. It laid there two or three
months, and was at last fetched away. Rainiharo sup-
posed, when they made their escape, they had taken his
money with them. When the parcel was opened, and
found to contain the money, and not only the capital but
the profit, and the unsold cloth, and a memorandum
with a clear account of the whole, mentioning even a
sixpence which they had taken to purchase provisions on
the road, he was astonished at their honesty, and said,
“ This is not the general custom of people, and especially
of slaves, who run away from their masters. These
would, indeed, make excellent servants ¢f they would but
leave off their religion, Most likely they have been
guilty again, and so have made their escape!” Joseph
did the same with the money which he held belonging
to his master, and which he had received from him for
similar purposes of trade.

When midnight arrived they set out, after commend-
ing each other to God in prayer. Simeon’s wife was
an invalid. She was an eminent Christian, but had not
yet been accused to the government as belonging to the
party. She felt much on seeing her hushand prepare to
go, and proposed to find him a place of concealment.
He also felt: much on her account, and, therefore, at the
risk of his life, relinquished the idea of attempting to
escape by flight, and resolved to remain at the capital.
The rest—Joseph, David and his wife, Andrianimanana,

L2
220 DIFFICULTY OF ESCAPING—RAFARAVAVY SOUGHT.

and Rafaravavy—adhered to their purpose of endeavour-
ing to escape. At that time of the year (the rice being
nearly ripe) there were watchmen in almost all directions,
and this made the attempt to run away the more dan-
gerous. Numbers of people, however, from the district
whither they were fleeing, were returning home from
the capital, after having been to the forest to fetch tim-
ber for the government, and the little party of Christians
was supposed by the watchmen to be their companions.
Thus they were allowed to proceed on their journey
without molestation ; and the next evening safely reached
the district of Itanimanina, about fifty miles from the
capital, where they were received with the utmost cor-
diality by their Christian friends, Rafaralahi-teasoa and
Andrianilaina, and Sarah, the wife of Andrianilaina ;
and, from that day to this, Sarah and Rafaravavy have
continued bosom-companions.

The morning after they had left home the messenger
of the queen, and of the first officer, went to Ambohitsiro-~
hitra to ask for Rafaravavy. They had an order to seize
her immediately, and put her to death. Not finding
her there, they went to her sister’s house, and from
thence to her husband’s, and searched nearly every
house where she was in the habit of visiting. Paul had
heard of the affair, and thought of making his escape ;
and, probably, had he known that these friends had
effected their escape from the capital, he would have
done so too. Their safety gave him as much anxiety as
his own. This caused him to delay his escape. When the
soldiers came to him, he was hesitating whether to set
off alone, or to go back and try to acquaint his Christian
HANDS TIED UP—PAUL. 221

friends, who were accused, with their danger. Andri-
anantoandro had heard nothing of it, and both he and
Paul, his father in Christ, were apprehended. Razafy,
Paul’s wife, was with him when he was apprehended.
She was anxious to follow her beloved husband, to see
his end, but he advised her not, saying to her, “Go,
and remain till the time for you arrives; my time is
now close at hand.”” Both Paul and Andrianantoandro
were put in very heavy irons, and their hands tied up in
a small basket; a sign, that it is intended to inflict
capital punishment.

Both were now in daily expectation of being put to
death. All the Christians at the capital, as well as Razafy
herself, thought, for some weeks, that Paul had been put
to death. Not any one of them could find out what had
become of him. In about three weeks, a Christian
soldier, an intimate friend, found him out, under the
charge of a guard of soldiers. Andrianantoandro was
confined in the same manner. These two eminent Chris-
tians suffered many afflictions, of which some further
account may be given at some future time. It was the
intention of the government to put these two to death,
as well as Rafaravavy and Andrianimanana; but, as the
last two had made their escape, they were unwilling to
execute the other two, lest it should induce those who had
run away to conceal themselves the more carefully. They
wished also to put all four to death at the same time, so
as to create greater terror in the minds of the other
Christians. The other two women who parted with
Rafaravavy on the way to the capital, made their escape
222 . CONCEALMENT.

in another direction, and are in exile to this day, as far
as can be known.

Our five friends, already mentioned,whe had set out from
the capital, having reached their friend’s house in Itani-
manina, united in praise for safety on their journey, and,
though they had had but little sleep the last two nights,
they had but little this also, for the greater part of it
was spent in giving a history of their escape from the
capital, and of the afflictions of their brethren, and espe-
cially their anxiety about Paul and Andrianantoandro ;
for as they had sent to them before leaving the capital, to
proceed without delay to this district, where they fully
expected to meet them, they began to fear they had been
apprehended ; and which, indeed, proved to be the case.
As it was impossible for their kind friends to conceal all
the five, it became important to find some hiding-place
for them. Some wished to go to the Sakalava country at
once ; others opposed it lest they should die with famine.
At last they decided on remaining there with their friends
for a few days, and to let two proceed to the village of
Paul, near Andringitra, to see whether they could meet
him. Joseph and Andrianimanana did so, and, though ex-
tremely fatigued, they arrived at the village in the evening,
after having walked more than thirty-five miles. They
met there the adopted son of Paul, and found that his
father had been taken by the soldiers that very day, and
had gone with them to the capital. They could ascertain
nothing more respecting him. On asking why he had
not followed his father, to see what the soldiers did with
him, he said he thought they were going to put him to
SWORD OR FAMINE ? 223

death, and he could not bear to see it; and suspected
also, that, if he followed him, he might be taken up
as one of the party, and, therefore, he had remained
at home. Joseph and Andrianimanana set out in the
morning on their return to Itanimanina and arrived late
in the evening. The consultation was seriously renewed
as to a probable place of concealment. Some of them
proposed going to the Sakalava country, but they knew
it was an enemy’s country; and, as the Hovas had
treated the Sakalavas with much cruelty, they feared
lest, by way of retaliation, the Sakalavas might, perhaps,
treat any Hovas that might fall into their hands in the
game manner. Besides, the road to it was a desert
country, and where could food be obtained in the wil-
derness ? “ We had better die by the sword,” said
they, “than by famine.” Joseph decided that he would
return to a friend, who frequently remained in the forest,
east of the capital, for weeks together. The four others
determined to proceed towards the Sakalava country.
Joseph went with them a mile or two, and, after uniting
in prayer, they separated, and he returned towards the
capital; but he had not gone far, when he met on the
road the very friend to whom he yas intending to go.
“Where are you going, and why do you smile?’ said
Joseph, “is all well at home?” not without fear that his
friend might be the bearer of the news that Rasoa, his
wife, had also been apprehended. ‘“ Yes,” said he, “all
is well at home ; but I could not help smiling to think
how the God whom you serve had led me in the right
path to meet with you. I had very faint hopes of finding
you when I set out, for I knew not the exact direction
224 ALL THINGS COMMON.

in which you had gone; and yet we have actually
met.”

They hastened back to their four friends, from whom
Joseph had just parted, to inform them that soldiers had
been sent out in search of them in every direction, and
that there was a great stir about them in the capital.
The friend proposed to take two of the number with him
to the forest, and it was mutually agreed that those two
should be Joseph and David. Soon after they had left,
the wife of Paul arrived, full of grief, on account of her
husband, who had been, she thought, already put to
death. Those who remained were taken care of by their
kind friends for about a week, when Razafy, hearing
that there was no search for her at the capital, determined
to return, that she might find out, if possible, what they
had done with her husband. Another eminent Christian
in that district, whose name must be concealed, sent for
our two friends to remain with him, and said, “ Let all
the Christians that are compelled to run away for their
lives, come to me. I will take care of them—as long as
I am safe, they are safe ; and as long as I have food, they
shall share it.”

On the return of Joseph and David to the capital, on
their way to the forest, they had much difficulty in find-
ing their friend’s house, who had very prudently pre-
ceded them, as it was dark and raining heavily. They
now found that they were everywhere sought for, but that
Raminahy, the wife of David, was not among the number
sought after, nor had she been accused. She therefore
determined not to run away till it might become neces-
sary, but urged that her husband David should accompany
RESURRECTION OF BURIED BOOKS. 225

Joseph. They set out soon after midnight, and proceeded
to a friend's house, eight or ten miles from the capital, not
far from the road. They arrived there before daybreak ;
their friend did all he could to comfort them, kindled a
fire, dried their lambas drenched with rain, prepared
provisions for them, and gave them a Bible, a Testament,
and a few tracts, (for he had had a box of books buried
near his house.) They then proceeded on their journey,
their friend giving them a little money, and sending them
part of the way till they had crossed some large streams
which were at that time much swollen by the torrents,
and difficult to cross. Next day they reached the part of
the forest they had fixed on as their place of concealment.
Joseph’s friend then met them, and they immediately
constructed a small temporary hut or shed, which might
answer the purpose till some ulterior measures were
adopted for their escape.

We now leave these two friends in the forest, and re-
turn to Itanimanina, where Rafaravavy and Andrianima-
nana also remained. The former had some pious and
faithful friends at the capital, watching attentively every
movement that might affect her, and from whom she
frequently received intelligence, and especially when a
fresh party was appointed to go in search of her. She
still remained with the friends who had first received
her on reaching their district. She slept in their house
by night, and hid herself among the craggy parts of
an adjoining mountain by day. Sarah was with her
the greater part of the time. They endured much hard-
ship and suffering ; frequently they were drenched with
rain from morning till evening, exposed to awful thunder

L3
226: RAFARAVAVY IN DANGER.

and lightning, and the electric fluid itself fell near
them several times. But having gone to the mountain in
a morning, they could not safely return to the house before
night, as the road was directly opposite the village, and
they were afraid of being seen. The friends with whom
Rafaravavy remained, supplied them with rice; but, as
they were poor, and provisions scarce, they were often in
want, though their kind hosts always shared even their
last morsel with them.

One evening Rafaravavy resolved on attempting to
return to the house before dark, but on reaching the foot
of the hill, a slave girl, who was fetching home the cattle,
saw her, went to her master, and said that she had seen
a miserably-dressed woman coming along, who was pro-
bably a runaway slave, for, on seeing her, she had turned
towards the hill. The master immediately went out,
hoping to get the two and a half dollars reward for
catching a runaway slave, and called on Rafaralahi-
teasoa, in whose house Rafaravavy remained, and told
him what his slave girl had said, and begged him to go
with him to the mountain in search of her, so as to get
part of the money. He knew the circumstances of the
case well, and of course declined going. Another young
man, intimate with this Rafaralahi-teasoa, and who
had conducted himself as a Christian for a long time,
though of a very timid disposition, suspected by the
manner of Rafaralahy* that he knew something about

* “Ra-fara-lahy” signifies the youngest son, as Ra-fara-vavy
means the youngest daughter. Of course these names frequently
occur in the same village. For the sake of distinction a further
name is added, as in the above instance, Rafaralahi-teasoa.
- RAFARAVAVY SOUGHT. 227

this reputed runaway slave, and therefore he also
refused to go further in search of her. By frequently
visiting at the house, he led Rafaralahy to think that
he knew one of the Christians was concealed there ;
zo they informed him at once of the fact, and intro-
duced him to Rafaravavy. He was highly delighted
to see her, and conversed much with her on religious
subjects. This new acquaintance, however, soon involved
them in danger, for he named to a friend of his the whole
affair. What his intention was in divulging the secret is
not certain, but it is thought he was so pleased himself
that he wished this other friend also‘to be introduced to
the party, with the hope of doing him good. The latter
in a few days went to the capital, and told Rainhiaro all
the circumstances of her concealment. He described the
house exactly, so that the soldiers might find it without
further inquiry. Eight men were immediately sent off to
seize her ; two of them arrived by the middle of the day
and went first to the hill, where it was said she was re-
maining, and not finding her there they proceeded to
the house. It being a cold morning, she and Sarah
had ventured to remain at home; the latter, hearing
more noise than usual among the crows, near the
house, started up, supposing they were devouring the
rice which had been spread on a mat before the door,
to dry in the sun, according to daily custom. The
moment she left the house she saw two men with
spears approaching, and gave immediate notice of it,

For brevity’s sake we shall in future designate him, simply,
Ra-fara-lahy, only observing that it is of the Rafaralahy described
in the Eighth Chapter.
228 RAFARAVAVY CONCEALED.

though in a low tone. ” Rafaravavy instantly con-
cealed herself under a bedstead in an adjoining room,
and covered herself with a mat. Sarah has frequently
since remarked that there appeared to her the special
hand of Providence in the occurrence; she had often
heard the crows before, but took no notice of them; on
this occasion, the thought crossed her mind so power-
fully that they were consuming the rice, that she went
out, and, had she not done so, the two men would have
been at the door in less than one minute, and all, Andri-
anilaina, Rafaravavy, and herself would have been found
together. Rafaralahy and his wife had just before
gone out. Sarah re-entered the house and remained with
her husband near the fire. The two soldiers entered and
told their business—that they came from the queen in
search of Rafaravavy, who was said to be concealed there.
“What Rafaravavy is it,” said Andrianilaina, “ you are
“searching for??? ‘‘Who does not know her,” said
they—‘‘ whose house and property have been confis-
“cated and scattered?” A long conversation followed,
in which Andrianilaina evaded the inquiries of the
pursuers, and endeavoured to appear unacquainted with
the party sought after, so far as he could without a false-
hood. They remained in the house about an hour, and
during all this time Rafaravavy overheard their conver-
sation, as merely a thin partition of matting was between
them, through which she saw them. She was alarmed
at firt, and breathed so hard she thought they would
hear her. Recovering from the surprise, she committed
herself to God and placed her trust in him. A re-
markably suitable text of Scripture came to her mind
SCHEME. 229

and composed her :—‘ Be not afraid of sudden fear,
neither of the desolation of the wicked, when it cometh ;
for the Lord shall be thy confidence, and shall keep thy
foot from being taken.” Prov. iii. 25, 26. She remem-
bered also how the Lord preserved David in the cave,
when Saul entered it in search of him. And if, said
she within herself, it be the will of God to save me, I
know he can and will—if not, his will be done, only
may I obtain forgiveness and meetness for heaven, and
strength to endure to the end. The words of the Saviour,
in John x. 28, 29, “‘ My sheep shall never perish, I give
unto them eternal life,’? &c., sustained her faith and
yielded her much consolation. Sarah left the house
during the time, and felt convinced there was no pro-
bability of escape. Almost as soon as she had gone out,
the brother-in-law of Simeon was approaching the house.
They did not know each other ; he asked rather timidly
if this was Rafaralahy’s house, and if he were at home.
On hearing that Andrianilaina was there, he begged
her to say that Simeon (Andrianomanana) wished to
speak to him. It fortunately happened just at the same
time that a man had come for payment of some money
from Andrianilaina, and was waiting near the house till
the two strangers had left. He was a Christian and a
faithful friend of Rafaralahy—knew that Rafaravavy was
there, and was glad to assist on the occasion to get An-
drianilaina out of the house even for a moment. Sarah,
with great presence of mind, took advantage of this
favourable circumstance, went into the house, and said,
in the hearing of the soldiers, “The man will not take
this dollar, you must exchange it for another.” “T have
230 SIMEON IN DANGER.

no other to give him,” said her husband. The soldiers
desired to see it, and asked, ‘“‘ Why does he refuse it?
Has not the queen ordered that all the dollars should be
considered of the same value in her country. Let him
mind what he is about.” ‘Go you,” said Sarah to her
husband, “ and tell him so, lest he should not believe
me.” He thus got away from the immediate observa-
tion of the soldiers, and found that Simeon had arrived
from the capital. He hastened to him, and told him
briefly how affairs stood. Simeon, who had not run
away with the others to Itanimanina, had remained at
home, at the desire of his wife, during the last three
months. He had been hitherto concealed by a friend at
the capital ; but when the search for the Christians was
now revived, he determined to escape to Itanimanina,
hoping to obtain some rest and safety there. Having
heard, however, from Andrianilaina the anxious state of
affairs, he returned to the capital after dusk, and soon
afterwards joined David and Joseph in the forest.

The two soldiers now came out of the house, thinking
that Andrianilaina, as he was out of their sight, had per-
haps gone to the mountain to warn Rafaravavy. Simeon
was nearly caught by them; in fact they saw him at a
short distance, but supposed him to be the man who
had come for the money. After eating some rice, the
soldiers went straight to the mountain, hoping to find
their victim there; and as soon as they had reached
some little distance from the house Andrianilaina re-
turned, and told Rafaravavy to make the best of her way,
and that the soldiers could not see her going out of
the village. He himself went, taking his Bible with
ESCAPE-—~ANDRIANILAINA. 231

him, to a small pit not far from the house, and concealed
himeelf there till evening. Sarah proceeded to her
mother-in-law, who was living not far from them.
Rafaravavy had left the house without either Sarah or
her husband knowing the direction she would take.
Yet they thought it likely she would go to Sarah’s
mother-in-law, and were much concerned when they
found, in the evening, that she had not been there.
They set out in search of her, and happily found her at
another village. When she quitted the house she had
no idea where she should go, but took care to keep as
far from the hill as possible. She went slowly at first,
lest any suspicion should be excited, and while passing
the opposite side of the hill she saw at a distance the
two men. She then proceeded as fast as she could to
the village where Rafaralahy had been attending on some
sick friends. The road was difficult; the grass was
coarse and long, often higher than her head; the night
came on, and it was extremely dark. She thought of
* Christian” going through the valley of the shadow of
death ; but remembered that, through much tribulation,
we must enter into the kingdom of heaven. She met
several persons, who seemed, however, as much afraid of
her as she was of them. Some ran from her with all
possible speed, thinking she was some highwayman.
She arrived late at night, and with some difficulty found
Rafaralahy, and he, having obtained a lodging for her in
another village with a friend of his, returned to his wife
and mother-in-law at the village. After a few hours
Andrianilaina and his wife arrived in anxious search of
Rafaravavy, and were greatly relieved when they found
232 NIGHT TRAVELLING.

she was there. Rafaralahy was anxious to induce his
wife to accompany him in trying to effect their escape
together, and to leave the children under the care of her
mother. She objected to this; saying that the children,
though young, were too heavy to be carried; neither
could she separate herself from them—she yearned over
them. She thought, too, that the queen would, at any
rate, do nothing to injure fer till the soldiers had found
him. She promised to follow him in the course of a
few weeks.

On leaving the village they fetched Rafaravavy from
her lodging-place, and proceeded together, not knowing
whither. Their Christian friends whom they acquainted
with their departure, and who deeply sympathised with
them, advised them not to go far at first, thinking they
also might have to escape with them, as having helped
to conceal Rafaravavy. Rafaralahy felt uneasy respect-
ing his wife, and went back to persuade her either to go
with him or to remove from her mother’s house, where
she was at present remaining, toa friend’s in a village
at some distance, and where the soldiers were not very
likely to find her. After travelling all night, and much
fatigued, he reached the village, and she consented to
remove to the friend alluded to. He then hastened
after his weary companions and met them at the
appointed place. They had one village more to call
at before taking their departure from the district. There
were several Christians in that village, and among them
an eminent Christian who had sent for Simeon (Andri-
anomanana) on the first arrival of the party in the dis-
trict, to live with him, promising to do all he could to
FOOD IN THE DESERT. 233

conceal him from his enemies, and with whom he had
now lived three months. A few friends followed them
to this spot, and others went to the village where Rafa-
ravavy had been nearly caught by the two soldiers, to
ascertain the state of things, and in what directions the
soldiers were advancing in search of them. They all
met and consulted at some distance from the village.
Several of the most intelligent of the Christians opposed
their attempting to find concealment in the wilderness or
the Sakalava country. One of their friends asked, ‘ Where
will you go? You cannot obtain food in the desert ; and,
besides, there are many enemies there who would injure
you; remain with me for the present, and do not be
afraid, for as long as Iam safe you are safe. If it be
found out that you are here, we shall all make our escape
together, for how could I think of remaining here and
denying God? If you go far away now it will be diffi-
cult to send you provisions, and unless you get supplies
from here you must certainly suffer from famine. The
best plan for me is to have you here with some of my
trusty servants, and for me and my family to remain in
my house at another village; if I and my family remain
here, so many are continually coming to me on public
business that there is every chance of discovery.”

The family of this friend then set out for a distant
village, generously leaving their present home in the occu-
pation of seven or eight trusty servants, for the persecuted
Christians, namely, Rafaralahy, Simeon, Andrianilaina,
and his wife, Sarah, Andrianomanana, and Rafara-
vavy. They were in hope of remaining unmolested for
some time in this place of retreat, and under the protec-
234 BOX OF BOOKS FOUND.

tion of such a faithful friend. The rest, who had gone
to see what the soldiers were doing, returned to them
with the report that they were seeking for them in every
house in and about Ambohifaly, not only for Rafaravavy,
but now for Rafaralahy and Andrianilaina and his wife,
and that they had repeatedly come to the house in the
night and returned into the mountain; that they pressed
the servant left in the house to tell where Rafaralahy was,
and had searched a trunk that was in the house, where
they found a Bible, catechisms, tracts, &c., and this had
condemned Rafaralahy and Andrianilaina and their fami-
lies, and had excited them to make a still more diligent
search. Their Christian friends sent to warn them to hide
very carefully. At the same time they found, from con-
fidentia] persona, they could conceal themselves no longer
with safety where they now were. This created much
anxiety; they knew not where to go: taking some pro-
visions, they went to a village at some distance, and
came to the house of a Christian friend, who kindly eon-
cealed them for a few days. Here the men and the
‘women agreed to separate. Andrianilaina ventured to
the capital to try to obtain some money from their
Christian friends there, so as to procure provisions to
reach the Sakalava country. Rafaralahy went to visit
his wife and children.

Here it may be worth while to digress a little, and
turn back to observe in what manner Simeon had been
concealed, during the three months mentioned, at the
capital. His hiding place, as already stated, was in the
house of a friend, and usually over the hearth. There
are no chimneys in the native houses. The fire-place is
A WARM BERTH. 235

at some distance from the wall, and a large kind of rack
is usually constructed at some eight or ten feet above it,
through which the smoke passes on its way to. the roof.
On this rack our friend Simeon was generally concealed
-—and he found it a sufficiently “ warm berth,” especially
at cooking time. The house belonged to a servant who
was working constantly in the fields; and therefore the
doors were generally shut during the day. On one
occasion when Simeon was alone in the house, and lying
down in his uncomfortable place of concealment, he
heard some one at the door, endeavouring to open it; a
man at length succeeded, entered, and took away some
meat and other articles; returned a second time and
carried away a quantity of rice. Simeon was in danger
of being caught by him, but was not detected. He knew
the thief and told his host of the theft. The latter im-
mediately went to the thief and accused him of what he
had done. He denied it at first, but when the man told
him how he entered the house, and what he took off
first, and how he returned a second time and took the
rice, &c., and added that one who had seen him told him
the facta, the thief believed that it was God who must
have told of him, for he felt sure no one could otherwise
have described so minutely his proceedings, and he was
equally persuaded that no mortal had been there. He
ran off, alarmed, lest all his other bad deeds should be
exposed and punishment overtake him. At another time
a person was drinking the “‘tangena” close by, and an
officer of the 11th honor and his Dekana came into the
house and remained there talking for some time exactly
under the spot where Simeon was hiding himself, and
235 PREDICTION NOT FULFILLED.

among other remarks, Simeon heard the officer say to his
attendants, ‘‘ These praying people are plainly throwing
away their lives. It is said they have done it again and
have fled; soldiers and officers are gone in pursuit of
them, and where can they intend to go? Wherever can
they find a place in which they will not be found out?
And Rafaravavy too, sister of Razakamanana—how many
times has she heen found out praying, and been nearly
put to death for it? She was confined in irons for five
months, and was just released from it and reduced to
perpetual slavery, and now it is said has done it again!
How foolish! Do they not clearly see that the queen
disapproves of it? Why do they not leave off? And a
woman, too; how can she possibly expect to escape ?”?
True, replied the officer’s Dekana, “‘ They have indeed
been foolish. They can find no hiding place; they will
wander about till they are caught; even men cannot
escape long, and much less women.”? So much for pre-
diction ; and yet these good folks are now in England ;
and even the “‘ women” have escaped.

To return—the two women, Rafaravavy and Sarah,
went to visit a relation of the latter who lived at
some distance. They arrived there late in the even-
ing; the relation was delighted to see her, and in-
quired who was the female friend with her. She
simply replied that she was her “friend.’? They soon
found soldiers had been there from the capital seeking
for “some woman that had run away;” and had left
orders in the village, that, should any strangers come
there, they were to be apprehended. This news gave
our two female friends much uneasiness. They saw
CONCEALMENT IN A CAVE. 237

they could not remain long there with any safety, and
agreed to leave early in the morning, and return to their
friends whom they had left the day before. They pro-
ceeded on their journey, and arrived late in the evening.
While passing a house in the village they heard a great
noise in it, as if many were talking. They passed the
house quietly, and reached the residence of their
female friends. She could scarcely speak to them
for some time; but at last told them that soldiers
were seeking for them in every direction through the
district; were entering every village, and search-
ing every house in the village; and that a party of
soldiers, with Rafiakarana (the native printer), the accuser
of Rafaralahy, at the head of them, was in that very
house wherein they heard the noise as they passed! “ And
where,” said this pious woman, “ shall I hide you to-night
and to-morrow morning ?’’ At last she thought she would
put them in a pit, or hole in the earth, which was near
her house, the mouth of it being covered over with
thorns and briers. They entered the pit, and remained
there a night anda day. Next day they came out, and
entered a small plantation of manioc belonging to
this good woman, and were there for a few days and
nights. Some nights they slept between large stones at
the river side, and sometimes on a mountain; sometimes
on the top of a grave, the high grass growing on the top
concealing them from sight. While hiding here, one
day, they saw Rafiakarana and his party, eight in num-
ber, passing close by in search of them, but were not
discovered. After remaining with this kind friend about
ten or twelve days, amidst great danger and anxiety,
238 A NARROW ESCAPE.

they resolved on removing to another friend, a few miles
off, thinking it was not advisable to remain long in the
same place. There were now but three of them in com-
pany, Rafaravavy and Sarah, and the wife of Rafaralahy,
who had joined them.

Rafaralahy and Andrianilaina, Sarah’s husband, had
gone to hide themselves in another place, and more than
one hundred soldiers were searching for them, leaving
instructions with all to apprehend strangers, and espe-
cially Rafaralahy or Andrianilaina. In many places the
people were already looking out for them. Part of the
time they were hiding in a cave which was reported to be
frequented by highwaymen, and where the following
singular incident occurred. In the middle of the day a
number of boys (watching cattle), from 12 to 15 years
of age, took courage to come near the cave, and to show
their daring, shouted out, “ Holla there! you highwaymen,
come out and fight.” This they continued for a long
time, till at length our two friends thought that some one
must have seen them entering the cave and told the boys,
and that perhaps while the boys were encouraged to shout
as they had done, the people might be collecting to seize
them. They thought it best to venture out, and did so ;
they came out together and pretended to run after the
boys for some distance, who were so thoroughly frightened
that each one ran as for his life, and continued to run for
some miles without stopping, and some of them without
even looking back. The two Christians had time to
make their escape from the cave and the neighbourhood.

The women thought that they would try to reach the
Christian friend just mentioned. All three set out
CONCEALMENT IN A BOG. . 239

together at cock-crow ; their way was near a market-
place kept on that day, and where the concourse from all
quarters was large. They took alad to conduct them, who
was directed to go before them at a short distance, and, if
he should see any of the soldiers, to give them a sign,
as agreed on. The lad kept before the three women, and
soon after sunrise, as they were approaching the market,
just as he had ascended a hill, which was not far from
a village, he saw about twenty soldiers coming to meet
them, and already very near them. He immediately
gave the signal, and the women turned with all possible
speed out of the road. Sarah and the wife of Rafara-
lahy ran fast, and got to a considerable distance, and
were out of sight before the soldiers reached the top of
the hill. Rafaravavy could scarcely move, and turned
to a bog that was close by, where she hid herself among
the large rushes. She remained there perfectly motion-
less until the soldiers had passed by; and although not
wholly concealed and near the road, they did not observe
her. After they had passed, she naturally wished to get
out of the bog, and to find her companions. But by
this time she had sunk so deep that she cowld not get
out without assistance ; and what grieved her most was,
her valued Bible, which was on her back, was being spoiled
by the mud. At length her two friends came up to her as-
sistance ; and, as soon as she was extricated, they all went
as fast as they could in a different direction from that
taken “by the soldiers, and, after travelling till quite
fatigued, reached a spot where they thought them-
selves safe ; but as they had not eaten food all day, and
it was now evening, they wished to remain there for the
240 FATIGUED AND HUNGRY.

night. Yet knowing that their friends would be anxious
respecting them, and probably be searching for them
all night, they determined to proceed. Exhausted as
they were, they proceeded on their way in the dark:
they could see no road or path by which to travel, but
took the direction they thought likely to bring them to
the village they wanted. Several people, at different
times, met them on the road, whom they supposed to be
highwaymen. Onone occasion four men ran after them ;
but they hid themselves in the long grass called vero ;
others ran away from them as fast as they could, as much
frightened at them as they were at others. On reaching
the house they found a friend from another village
searching for them, as Rafaralahy and Andrianilaina
wished to arrange with them about going still further
away, as the soldiers in search of them were now so
numerous that it was almost impossible for them to
remain longer in that district without discovery. The
women, tired as they were, started immediately with this
friend, and reached the house where the other two
friends were remaining in concealment. After offering
afresh thanksgivings to God for his protection hitherto,
and again imploring his guidance, they came to the
determination of going to the wilderness, although some
of their friends feared they would then not only suffer but
perish from hunger. They, set off before dawn, and, after
travelling about ten miles, came near the residence of a
long tried and Christian friend; but as he was a man of
importance in the district, they thought it probable that
some of the soldiers might be there with him, and yet they
were unwilling to leave the district without seeing him. As
CONCEALED IN A PLANTATION. 241

Sarah was the least known to any persons who might
have come from the capital. She was sent to the village
to tell him of their arrival, while the rest hid themselves
among the grass. He was much pleased to see her;
asked about the others; and, finding that they were not
far off, he sent one of his confidential servants to fetch
them up to the village.

As soon as he saw them he burst into tears, and ex-
pressed his delight on meeting them once more. He had
suffered the utmost anxiety on their account the last fort-
night, knowing that so many were seeking for them.
He made them remain with him till the following day,
promising to take care that no one should find them
there. The plan of going to the wilderness was again
relinquished from the impossibility of procuring food
there. He proposed digging a large hole at one end of
his house, and partitioning the house, so that they might
remain in it until the soldiers returned to the capital.
The hole was commenced, but found not to answer. He
then decided on making a small tent and putting it up in
his plantations of manioc, in a spot where the long grass
happened to be so high as to cover completely the tent.
This was done without delay, and the friends were
placed in it. He then fixed a “kiady” round the plan-
tation, and being a man of influence in the district, gave
strict orders that no man, woman, or child, stranger, or
other person, should enter on that spot of ground, it being
private property. They remained here withcut much
fear for three months, and were well supplied by this
good man, he himself sometimes carrying cooked pro-

M
242 INCREASE OF NUMBERS.

visions to them, and at other times sending it by his
wife, or confidential servants.

Ever since his conversion to Christianity, he had care-
fully observed the Sabbath, and had not made any
change in this respect even when the queen issued her
edict. He had now a little band of Christians with him,
and convened as many as he could of his relations
in his house on the Sabbath, to unite with them and
his family in divine worship. Several members of his
own family became serious at this time, and all of them
learned to read, besides several persons on his estate,
and many of his servants. In all about twenty com-
menced learning, and nearly ail were able to read in the
course of a few weeks. His sister and her husband,
who lived some miles distant, came with part of their
family every Sabbath to unite with them. After remain-
ing with him about a month, his sister much wished
Rafavavy, and Sarah, with her husband, to go and spend
a few weeks with her, as she lived in a very retired spot,
where it was not likely the soldiers would find them.
Rafaralahy and his wife still remained. The three went
accordingly with the sister, and taught her and her hus-
band, and part of the family, the way of salvation more
fully. By this time the soldiers had returned home to
the capital, and had given up the pursuit as fruitless.

_ After remaining with the sister about three weeks, they
received a letter from a friend at the capital, to say that
Mr. Johns had arrived at Tamatave. This was his
second visit there, and made with the express object of
ascertaining the state of our Christian friends in Mada-
ARRANGEMENTS FOR ESCAPING. 243

gascar. He therefore wished his arrival to become as
extensively known as possible, so that the Christians on
hearing of it might seize every opportunity they could of
communicating with him. He thought if the people
generally knew of his being there, the Christians, even
though in concealment, would, by some means, come to
hear of it. He therefore wrote letters to the queen, to
Rainiharo, and several of the officers. Their aides-de-
camp spread the information, and a friend residing at the
capital, a near relative to the one who had taken so
much care of them, sent immediately to the district
where they were, to inform them that Mr. J. was at
Tamatave, and wrote at the same time to the latter to
request him to remain on the coast for a few weeks.
Rafaralahy was at this time ill and unable to remove.
Andrianilaina, his wife, and Rafaravavy, proceeded to
the capital, intending to go forward without delay to the
coast. A valuable friend at Tananarivo advised the two
women to remain concealed, and to fet Andrianilaina and
another Christian friend go down to the coast and see
whether Mr. Johns was still there, and whether there
was any probability of their getting away from the coun-
try. On their way to the capital, Rafaravavy was nearly
caught. She was dressed in a common rofia cloth,
and carried a large bundle on her head; Sarah and
Andrianilaina wore ‘“lambas,””? white cloth dresses.
They appeared as master and mistress, and Rafaravavy
as servant. In this way they travelled for three days, and
on the third day, in the afternoon, came in sight of the
capital; they advanced slowly, with the intention of
entering the capital soon after dark. As they were ad-
mM 2
244 RAFARAVAVY RECOGNISED.

vancing, two or three slaves overtook them near a small
market held on the road-side. The slaves kept pace
with them, and at last, one of them said, “ You are the
sister of Razakamanana.” Rafaravavy made no reply ;
but Sarah asked, “ What Razakamanana?” ‘You
know what Razakamanana I mean,” said she. “I never
saw him,” replied Sarah, with truth, for it happened that
she did not know him, and never had seen him. After
a few more remarks, the slaves turned off to the market,
which was close at hand.

The three Christians were now much alarmed, as it
was evident one of the slaves, at least, knew Rafaravavy
perfectly well. They suspected that they had gone to
the market to tell the people there to go and seize them.
They hardly knew whether to advance or return, but sat
down for a few moments that they might appear not to
be hurrying away, and then advanced without molestation.
The shades of evening soon concealed them from sight,
and they safely reached the house of a friend at the
capital. In the evening the slave mentioned above told
Andrianandraina, to whom Rafaravavy had been sold,
and who was also a first aide-de-camp of Rainiharo, that
she had seen Rafaravavy near such a village, and that she
thought she was hiding in that village, as it belonged to
a relation of Rafaravavy. Her master and the people
did not believe it, and merely said, “ If she had seen her,
why had she not taken her up?” Here the affair ter-
minated, but the incident showed how very narrow had
been the escape.

Rafaravavy remained in the house of one friend, and
Sarah in that of another. As the latter was not
THE DOOR KEPT SHUT. 245

known at the capital, there was not much difficulty in
concealing her ; it was much more difficult to conceal
Rafaravavy, since she was known to almost everybody.
She was put in a part of the house thought to be quite
adapted for the purpose, and remained concealed there
more than a fortnight. One day, about fifteen or twenty
men came-to the house suddenly, on some business from
the government, and had occasion to examine the whole
of it; they had no idea that Rafaravavy was there, nor
had they come in search of her. The owner of the
house became uneasy while they were there, and though
not a person easily alarmed, he felt anxious now,
not seeing how she could possibly escape. After they
had looked over all the other parts of the house, they at-
tempted to enter that part where she was. The door was
shut, and they tried hard to push it open; -Rafaravavy
pushed on the other side. They perceived the owner of
the house was remarkably uneasy, and it struck them
that perhaps he kept his “‘ ody ” (charms or idols) there,
and gave him a hint of the kind; a mistake which he
did not think it needful to correct.

They left the house as if for the purpose of giving him
an opportunity to remove his “ ody ;” and as soon as they
had left, he called Rafaravavy to come out without delay,
and led her out of the house by a different exit; she
escaped over a wall, and reached another friend’s house
without being seen. The men in less than a minute re-
turned, and entered the very place where she had been
concealed. This happened in the day-time, and many
of the Christian friends stood not far off looking on with
trembling anxiety.
246 CONCEALMENT IN THE FOREST.

We left Joseph, David, and Simeon, in the forest, east
of Ambatomanga. The friend who led them there did
all he possibly could to make them comfortable, and
supplied them with rice from the capital.

His work in the service of the government pre-
vented him, however, from visiting them as often as he
wished, and all the rice he could give them he had to
carry from the capital, a distance of 40 or 50 miles; he
was naturally timid, and would not venture to tell any,
even of the Christians, where they were concealed, so
that none of them visited them even once in the forest, not
knowing the exact spot where they were. They suffered
much during these five or nearly six months from want
of sufficient food, and from the heavy rains. Having
merely a sort of shed to live in, which exposed them to
constent chills and damps, their health suffered, and
they were more than once in great danger of being
apprehended as robbers and brigands, by the people
fetching timber.

One advantage of being in the forest was, they had
plenty of fuel; and they found ample time for reading
and prayer. After their friend had supplied them for
about four months, he found his little resources almost
exhausted, and told them that he must go to another part
of the forest at some distance to make bowls which he
might sell at the capital, and so obtain money to purchase
rice for them, since he had none left; David went with
him, as he was less known in that part than either Joseph
or Simeon. Besides which, the latter were extremely
feeble and could hardly stand on their fect. Their friend
left with Joseph and Simeon a sufficient quantity of rice
ARRIVING AT A FAVOURABLE TIME. 247

to support them for three weeks, and as he was to have
David with him to assist him in making the bowls, he
imtended to return within the time mentioned with a fresh
supply of provisions, obtained by the fruit of their united
labours in the forest. After appointing a time and a
place to meet David he returned to the capital. David
in the mean time was anxious to leave his two sick
friends in as much comfort as their circumstances ad-
‘mitted, and contrived a better sort of shed for them ;
but while arranging the wood for it, the day befure he
was to set out, he cut his foot with an axe which dis-
abled him from walking. He was now obliged to remain
and take a share of the rice allotted only for Joseph
and Simeon, and as three persons were eating instead.
of two, they consumed it some days before the three
weeks had expired.

They tried to find roots or wild fruits to eat, but could
not; and it became a very serious affair with them what
to do. After much fervent prayer they said to one
another, ‘“‘ Why do we sit here till we die? Let us try to
reach our friends in the capital, if we are preserved
from being discovered we shall live, if we are caught we
can but die.” They set out the next day, reached the
capital, and were concealed by their friends. On leav-
ing the forest it was their intention to return without
delay after obtaining food, and therefore buried their
bible, testaments, and other books, with their axes, &c.,
in the earth, and there they remain most likely to this
day. On arriving at the capital they heard that Mr.
Johns had reached Tamatave, that Rafaravavy and another
persecuted friend had also come to Tananarivo, intending
248 DIVINE PROVIDENCE.

to go down to the coast, hoping to effect their escape
across the water, and that Andrianilaina and another
friend had gone down to Tamatave to ascertain the pro-
bability of their getting off, and were expected back
ere long.

Thus for the space of eight months were our friends
mercifully preserved amidst innumerable dangers. Every
day renewed its difficulties; but in every difficulty God
provided for their escape, and thereby confirmed their
faith in his word, their trust in his providence, and their
hope that he would keep them “ to the end.”
THE MESSENGERS AT TAMATAVE. 249

CHAPTER X.

Journey of the Refugees from Tananarivo to the Coast, where
they embarked for Mauritius ; including various providential
Escapes from Discovery and Apprehension on the Road.

Iv has been already mentioned that Andrianilaina, and a
companion, left the capital for Tamatave with the view of
meeting Mr. Johns there, and making some final arrange-
ments with him for the escape of some of the persecuted
Christians to Mauritius. They reached Tamatave safely
while Mr. Johns was yet there, and entered the house he
occupied about the middle of the day. As he knew the
government was seeking for Andrianilaina, it may be
conceived how anxious he felt on seeing him and his
companion. He had no place in which to conceal them,
and as his house was filled with visitors nearly the whole
of the day, and they would be in constant danger there of
apprehension, he sent for his confidential friend, Rami-
andrahasina, and explained to him the whole affair,
persuaded that, though he held a high office under go-
vernment, he would not betray the Christians, but rather
aid them in effecting their escape.

On stating the case to him, he deeply sympathised in
the anxiety of Mr. Johns, and advised Andrianilaina to
remain on the coast until his companions came down
from the capital,.and to let the friend now with him re-
turn, and urge those who could effect their escape to

u 3
2350 PLAN OF ESCAPE.

attempt it without delay. He immediately went to the
village, and, being a man of authority in that part of the
country, took possession of a house not occupied; then
conducted Andrianilaina to it, with his nephew (James,
now in England) and a confidential servant to remain
with him, and put up a “kiady”’ before the door to for-
bid the entrance of any intruders, as though a sick per-
son was there. It being known that Ramiandrahasina
had put up the kiady, no one ventured to approach the
house. After remaining there part of two days he sent
him to another village thirty or forty miles distant,
with his confidential servant, who was to remain’ with
him till the ship arrived. The other friend hastened
back to the capital with letters to explain the plan, and
to direct them to proceed to the village where Andriani-
laina was concealed. All this"having been settled, it
was thought advisable for Mr. J. to return to Mauritius,
and a final arrangement was made with a captain to
bring them there from Madagascar. The amount agreed
on was 400 dollars, 80/. sterling ; which sum was spon-
taneously and generously collected on the spot. Letters
were then given the captain to the person on the coast
who had concealed the refugees, and who was to be pre-
pared to convey them safely on board.

During the absence of Andrianilaina’s companion on
his journey to the coast and back to the capital, our
friends managed to avoid discovery. Rafaravavy was
concealed in the house of one friend, Sarah in that of
another, and the rest of the party among different friends.

On the return of Andrianilaina’s companion with
money to our Christian friends to purchase provisions
LEAVING THE CAPITAL. 251

on their journey to Tamatave, and letters and instruc-
tions as already mentioned, they resolved on setting out
immediately. Rafaravavy was anxieus to see once more
her nephew, Andrianantoandro, who had been now in
irons for six months, namely, since the death of Rafara-
lahy. Putting ona cloth resembling that usually worn
by slaves, she went to his house, long after dusk, and
although soldiers were guarding him they took no notice
of her, supposing her to be a servant of one of his friends
who was in the habit of visiting him with rice. He was
still in irons, and at the moment she arrived happened to
be asleep. She durst not venture to speak to him, lest
her voice should lead to her detection. She pressed his

_ hand and left him. He was informed of it in the morn-
ing, and was deeply affected. She parted from him
without any expectation of seeing him again in this
world.

Late at night our five friends, namely, Rafaravavy,
Sarah, David, Simeon, and Joseph, set out by agreement
from the capital, full of fear and joy. Many tears were
shed both by the Christians remaining, and by those
leaving ; and many fervent prayers were offered up for
the divine blessing and protection. Two friends accom-
panied them as servants to the coast, and it was arranged
that one should go before them at a short distance, and
the other behind. If the one before saw any person likely
to know them he was to call to the one behind, “ Fain-
gana ley iry”-—“ Make haste ;”’ and should one be coming
behind, then the one behind was to call on the one in
advance, “ Andraso kely”—‘* Wait a litle.”” The orders
were of course to be obeyed inversely ; the command to
252 WISE AS SERPENTS.

“ make haste” implied ‘ get out of the way as soon as
you can ;” and “ wait a little” meant “ go on as fast as
possible.” And at any rate the party in the middle
would have time to turn out of the road, or, if caught,
their two guides would not appear connected, and so not
be involved in danger, with them. The plan answered
well when they came to the forest, where the paths are
narrow and circuitous, and where an opportunity of con-
cealment occurs so frequently. By daybreak they were
ten or twelve miles from the capital, and hesitated
whether to conceal themselves during the day or proceed
on their journey; but as they could not find a con-
venient hiding-place they determined to advance.

In the morning they met suddenly with some persons,
one of whom knew Joseph perfectly well, noticed him,
and looked after him some time. This induced them to
turn at once out of the road, and direct their way towards
the forest till they were out of sight, when they returned
again to the high road; so that, if the men who had
just passed should tell the people in the neighbouring
village, they might be induced by the stratagem to direct
their steps towards the forest. After a time they turned
out of the road and read the 18th chapter of Luke,
and took courage, especially from the 2%th verse :—
“* The things which are impossible with men are pos-
sible with God.” They walked about there and pre-
pared provisions, as they could not venture through
the village before night. After dark they proceeded,
using their lamp which a friend had given them and
which they found of great service. They now remem-
bered and conversed about God having led the children
HARMLESS AS DOVES, 253

of Israel by the pillar of fire. Ex. xiii. 21. When
they got near the village they recollected what Gideon
did, and divided themselves into small companies, lest
the villagers should hear their steps on passing through,
and come out from their houses to see so large a com-
pany ; and then, lest the lamp should awaken suspicion,
they put it, not in their pitchers, but in their cooking
utensils.

This village is on the road just before coming to Am-
bodinangavo. Near the latter is a descent, which our
party found extremely difficult. The rain poured in
torrents, they slipped almost every moment, and could
only advance by holding each other’s hands. They recol-
lected Bunyan’s description of Christian walking on all
fours, and felt they were like him. When they began to
ascend they found the difficulty as great as at the descent.
They talked of Christian in Pilgrim’s Progress, and re-
membered his saying, “‘ Though the ascent is steep, I
will go up ; though the road be difficult, its difficulty shall
not discourage me.” ‘They took the same resolution, and
felt it was for life—pressed onward and reached the top
of the hill almost unawares, without being sensible of
their fatigue. On descending the hill they exhorted one
another to proceed with the utmost caution, as a single
fall might precipitate them to a great distance. “ Let us
learn to keep,” said they, profiting by their situation,
‘* ¢ the narrow path,’ in the strength of the Lord, and
hope to continue stedfastly in it till we reach the end of
our journey, and may the Lord keep us from falling.”
They saw a fire at some distance, and supposed it might
be a light belonging to some of the queen’s letter-car=
254 DREAD OF AN ENCAMPMENT.

riers; and as the road was narrow, and there was no
place of concealment at hand, they extinguished their
candle to avoid discovery, and turned slightly out of the
path in time to allow the party to pass by.

It was now about midnight; and at a little distance
from the road they laid down to sleep. No sleep, how-
ever, could be obtained; the rain continued incessantly
till the morning, and they were soaked through. They
talked of their uncomfortable situation, having nothing to
defend them from the cold and rain, but were cheered
by the hope of a world “where the wicked cease from
troubling and the weary are at rest.”? About cock-crow
they proceeded on their journey, but, as there were two
or three hundred soldiers a little before them going
to Tamatave, and encamping, they were informed,
about ten miles in advance of them, they felt anxious
how to pass them without being seen. Many of the
soldiers knew them perfectly well, and the Dekana
of Rainiharo were with them. Many of the officers
knew Rafaravavy, and some of them had been in
search of her. They thought it safest to advance. It
was dangerous to remain long where they were, as
other soldiers had been sent off from the capital in search
of highwaymen in that direction, and the woodcutters
were not far from the spot. If they should see them
they would apprehend them as highwaymen or runaway
slaves. They thought it safer and easier to pass the
camp of the soldiers near dawn of day than afterwards,
for, it being much colder at that time than any other
part of the night, the men keep within their tents more
closely. Committing themselves to the care of the Keeper
DREAD OF PURSUERS. 255

of Israel, they went forward, and with great difficulty
came to the village of Ambodinangavo. Soldiers are
stationed here waiting to convey letters for the govern-
ment, but there was no possibility of going by any other
path than through the village. As they entered it some
of the people opened their doors and looked out; but,
seeing so many persons passing without signs of fear,
they were not suspected, and so got through unmolested.
The next difficulty was how to pass the camp of the
soldiers, to which they thought themselves approaching. |

But encouraged to hope that He who had hitherto pre-
served them would still protect them, they went on, and,
arriving at the spot where it was told them the troops were
encamping that night, found to their great astonishment
and delight, not one there. They said to one another,
‘6 The Lord has indeed prepared our way before us ; let us
be thankful, take courage, and advance diligently on our
journey.” About nine o’clock they remained some little
time, partook"of some refreshment, and hoped to reach
the Mangoro river soon after dark. They saw presently
several men coming towards them, wearing white lambas,
a sign that they were some persons of consequence, and
Hovas. They left the path, and found that those follow-
ing them turned in the same direction, and in an instant
they saw_many others coming up behind them, and that
they also turned out of the path to follow their steps.
They now thought, beyond a doubt, that they were per-
sons in pursuit of them. They hurried on till they
came to a hollow, and got among the bushes, where they
left the two servants who were with them, and Sarah, to
sit by the path until those in sight had passed, lest, if
256 CROSSING THE RIVER.

they should come forward and not see any of them, it
might make them suspect that they were people running
away, even if they had no suspicion of the kind before.
They hurried to the bushes; and, though they had no
time to untte in asking the protection of God, they re-
membered Psal. 1. 15, “Call upon me in the day of
trouble: I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me ;”
and urged each other to be fervent in prayer. The men
came forward, and took no notice of the two servants
and Sarah ; and, after having passed to some little distance,
our friends came out of the bushes and again proceeded.
They had not gone far before the servant in advance
called out, ‘‘ Make haste, there!” They understood the
signal, and turned into the wood; from whence, after
the party causing the alarm had passed, another signal
was given, and they went on. In this manner they pro-
ceeded till they came near the Mangoro, and then loi-
tered about till night, not knowing how to pass this
large river. The number of crocodiles in it renders it
impossible for any one to swim over, and the only canoe
to be had is kept in one place, under the charge of men
employed by the government, who inquire of every one
passing over his business. ‘There was no possibility of
crossing without a canoe. It was dark when they came
to the place where the canoe crosses, but, fortunately,
they came at an excellent juncture; some soldiers had
just crossed, and the boatmen, supposing them to be
their companions and attendants, took them over without
objection.

After crossing the river they pretended to be going
towards the village to rest for the night, but were, in
THE PATH LOST. 257

fact, most anxious to avoid it, as the soldiers that were
going down to Tamatave were lodging there. Hence
they resolved to go on as fast as possible, so as to get
some distance in advance of them. They lighted their
lamps ; but, as the plain from Mangoro to Moramanga is
very extensive, and the footpaths not easily seen in the
night, they lost their way, and wandered about for a long
time. There were many small footpaths, and it was diffi-
cult to find the right one. While in search of the right
road they remembered in what trouble Pilgrim was when
he lost his certificate. They found the path at last, “‘ fetched
strength,” and proceeded till they came to a place where
there was a bridge, or rather a narrow plank, at a con-
siderable height above the water, which shook at every
step, and was so narrow that two persons could not walk
together. The water was wide and deep; the women
began to fear crossing, and inquired if there was no other
way to get over, but ascertained that there was none.
They then remembered what “the shining ones”? had
said to Christian and Hopeful when they asked if there
was no way to the Celestial City but through the river.
It took them some time to get over, but they succeeded
in passing this dangerous place in safety. They again
lost their path, and, in searching it here and there, lost
the direction of it altogether ; some of them thought the
east was in this direction, and others thought it was in
the opposite direction; and, as they had neither sun,
moon, nor stars, map nor compass, nor guide to lead
them, they laid down, tired and hungry, weak and
exhausted ; for they had had little rest since leaving the
capital. But as they had waded through several bogs,
258 TRAVELLING IN THE FOREST.

and were cold, they could obtain no sleep, though so
fatigued as to be scarcely able to move their feet. At
last, watching for the morning, they saw day dawn; it
pointed out to them the east, and they directed their
ways eastward, remembering the star which directed the
wise men to the Saviour. After travelling hard for
several hours they came to Ampasimpotsy. As many
were passing and repassing here from the coast, they
durst not venture into any house, but sat down by the
water-side, pretending to wash and dry their clothes, so
that no one might suspect the reason why they did not
enter into the houses as others,

After resting for some little time, and uniting with
one another in prayer and praise, they recommenced
the journey; but as the path was now through the
great forest, where it would not be easy to turn aside
in case of meeting any of the Hovas, it was necessary to
make fresh arrangements. They still kept one of the
servants before and one behind, but dressed Sarah ac-
cording to the custom of the country in the best style
they could, that she might appear like a wife of an officer
going down to reside with her husband on the coast.
Rafaravavy was dressed in common Rofia cloth, as if a
servant of Sarah, having a straw hat and large bundle on
her head, so that a small portion only of her face was
visible. Thus they came on the fourth day beyond
Alamazaotra, the most difficult part of the forest, and, as
they were now much fatigued, they turned aside a little
into the depths of the forest, and laid down till the
morning, too wearied to obtain sleep. In the middle of
the night some soldiers passed by near them, carrying
ONE .OF THE PARTY RECOGNISED. 259

torches with them. They thought they were in search of
them, but found they were carrying letters for the govern-
ment.

Proceeding in the morning, several persons’ passed
them, some of whom they knew, but who did not recognise
them. To avoid being recognised they covered their faces
az much as they could, and overheard the people, as they
passed along, remark to one another,—‘ These people
are ill in the small-pox, and hence they cover themselves
up in this manner.”? This made them think it was im-
prudent to cover their faces so much, as it might lead
to their being apprehended ; persons having the small-pox
not being allowed to associate with others or travel about,
but, to avoid communicating the infection, being required
to remain in sheds or huts at a distance from any village.

Going up hill in the midst of the forest, Simeon, being
a little in advance of the party, saw a number of native
traders close by, and made sign to his companions, who
turned out of the path into the forest as quickly as pos-
sible; but, as the men had already seen Simeon, he
thought it safest to keep straight on towards them, re-
membering at the moment what Watchful said to Chris-
tian when he saw the lions. in the way,— Fear not the
lions, for they are chained.” Some of them he knew
perfectly well; they also knew him, and they saluted
each other. After passing them, one of the servants of
the refugee party, as if having no connexion with Simeon,
contrived to listen to what they were saying. One of the
traders remarked, “‘ That is Andrianomanana (Simeon),
who was lately sold to Rainiharo on account of his reli-
gion; where can he be going now?” The other said,
“Is he not a trader? Most likely Rainiharo has sent
260 JOURNEY TO BEFORONA.

him to sell some goods on the coast ;” and so suspicion
was lulled and the danger avoided. After these people
had gone on, our party came out from the spot where
they had concealed themselves, and went forward
thanking God for this narrow escape. .

After advancing a little way they saw two men coming
after them, by whom they were soon overtaken ; they had
no place to turn out of the road, and they had been seen
before they saw the party coming forward. On meeting,
the strangers asked them questions as if they suspected
them, and followed them some time. Our friends were
all anxious to get away from these persons, and at last they
sat down complaining of being tired; but as soon as they
sat down, the other party sat down also. On getting up
and proceeding on their way, their unwelcome companions
did the same. They then bent their course to a village
close by, intending to remain there for the night; the
others did the same, and actually turned towards the
village with them. Our friends then said to one another,
in the hearing of the strangers, that, as it was so early in
the afternoon, they had altered their minds and would go
forward to Beforona. Thither they accordingly pro-
ceeded. After a while they saw the two men following
them, and, full of anxiety, concluded they suspected them,
and intended to have them taken up as soon as they
should meet with any soldiers.

The refugees reached Beforona together, and then felt
compelled to go to the village and sleep there, for if they
advanced, it would at once convince the party suspecting
them that they were runaway slaves and afraid of being
seen. They thought if they went to the village it might
remove suspicion. This was the fifth night since they
SOLDIERS AVOIDED. 261

left the capital, and the first that they entered any house.
They passed the night in much anxiety lest the two men,
with some others, should enter the house and apprehend
them. At dawn of day they left the village and reached
Ampasimbe, whence, after resting awhile, they proceeded,
but here they had a narrow escape, as numbers of the sol-
diers met them, some of whom knew Rafaravavy. Happily
theconcerted signalof the servant inadvance gave them time
to turn out of the road and conceal themselves. Soon after
passing these soldiers, the two men they left at Beforona
overtook them and asked them where they intended lodg-
ing that night. They said they had not decided. The
two men then went forward, and our friends remained
behind. After again advancing a short distance, the
servant at their head made the usual signal, and they
concealed themselves. A party of soldiers, armed with
spears and swords, were coming forward, but passed on
without observing our friends.

They now intended to go beyond Ambatoharanana,
knowing that in that village was a dekana of one of the
first officers who knew them well, and they considered
that village a dangerous place for them. Before
approaching the village they waited for the shade of night
to conceal them, and were anxious to find some other
path without going through the village, but in this they
did not succeed. They were compelled to decide on
going through it at all hazards. After dark they
advanced, but on coming near the village, they found
numbers of the inhabitants sitting in the middle of it,
directly in their path, and among them the two men
who had followed them on the road, and another man
who knew Rafaravavy. They attempted to pass and pro-
262 IN GREAT DANGER.

ceed on their journey, but on seeing it, the people cried
out, ‘ Where are you going such a dark night as this?
Why not sleep in the village as others do?” They
replied, “ We intended to go forward to the village before
us.” “Is there no food with us?” said they; “ stop
here as other people do.”

Our friends felt obliged to remain here even in the
midst of danger, and actually ‘entered the very house they
would most anxiously have avoided, it being next to that
in which the dekana mentioned resided, though they
were not aware of it at the moment. Rafaravavy laid
down, and covered herself over with a lamba, as if unwell.
Shortly after they had entered, the two men, whom they
had regarded with so much suspicion, came into the house
and gave their packages into their charge and went out.
They thought certainly the men were gone to fetch the
soldiers residing in the village to take them up, and
they said to one another, “ Let us fervently pray, for God
can shut the mouths of these men, and deliver us from
the hand of the enemy.” If we are caught here we
shall be put to death, apparently for running away
rather than for praying, and the enemy will say,
“These praying people intended to run away, but the
hasina (that which is sacred) has prevented them, and
they are caught.”

Rafaravavy and her companions then remembered
Deut. xxxii. 27, “ Were it not that I feared the wrath of
the enemy, lest their adversaries should behave themselves
strangely, and lest they should say, Our hand is high, and
the Lord hath not done all this.” They offered fervent
prayer, their fears subsided, and they found encourage-
ment from Jer. i. 8: “ Be not afraid of. their faces, for I
UNDER SUSPICION OF DETECTION. 263

am with thee to deliver thee, saith the Lord.”? The two
men returned and fetched away their packages, and re-
moved to another house. Thus they passed the sixth night
on their journey.

At cock-crow next morning they departed full of grati-
tude to God for his protection, for they had certainly been
in the most imminent danger of being detected, as so many
persons in the employment of the government were re-
siding here. They proceeded as fast as possible until
they got beyond Ranomafana. Fatigued and hungry,
they left the path and sat down to cook some rice. The
two men already mentioned again came up with them,
and seeing them resting, they also rested. This increased
the suspicion of the refugees. They offered the men some
rice, remembering the words of the Apostle, ‘ Therefore
if thine enemy hunger, feed him ; if he thirst, give him
drink.”” Romans xii. 20. But they refused, or took
scarcely any. Our friends then said to each other,
“These men seem like enemies—they follow us and yet
refuse toeat with us. It is a bad sign, for they must be
as hungry as we are.” On going forward, the two men
went first, and, as our friends found, took @ large leaf,
and placed it on the road. The latter could not conceive
what was the design of this action. They thought it might
be a signal agreed on between them and some of the
soldiers who were coming forward to seize them, and that
they had put the leaf there as a mark of their having seen
them. They, therefore, threw away the leaf, and one of
the servants remained concealed to see whether any should
come up with the intention of getting before them, and so
to warn them in time.
e

264 A NIGHT’S REST.

After advancing a little, they saw the two men sitting
down as if waiting for them. They kept on and passed
them. In a little while the men overtook them again.
Our friends went on slowly, and allowed them again to
get in advance. They then proceeded until they reached
Maro-omby, by which time the servant overtook them.
The two men went up to the village, and the fugitive party
went forward on their journey. They intended to reach
Ambohibohazo the same evening, and as it was very rainy
and cold, and the earth quite wet, they intended to enter,
after dark, some house where no strangers frequented.
But as they were passing through a village in the way to
Ambohibohazo, they saw a number of houses without in-
habitants, for the people had gone to do the fanompoana,
or government service. They entered one of these empty
houses and were much refreshed with a night’s rest.
They were delighted with their lodging, for they seemed
to be out of immediate danger, and every night that they
had hitherto slept in a village, they had been under the
constant and harassing apprehension of being seized.
They found that sleep is sweet to the weary. As there
were but few people in this village, and none in the house
where they remained, they lodged without fear, and
called it the ‘* Porter’s Lodge,” for it seemed as if it had
been made for their relief and security. In the morning
they endeavoured to hire a canoe to take them the re-
mainder of their journey, as they were not only much
wearied, but it appeared to them the safer mode of proceed-
ing. They could not obtain one for the little money they
had, and hence were compelled to proceed by land. They
prepared some rice to carry with them, so that, should
PROCEEDING.ALONG THE BEACH. 265

they meet with - persons théy suspected, they might turn
out of the road and appear to be taking a meal, so as to
avoid the suspicion that they had left the path in order
to conceal themselves.

On reaching Andevoranto, they left the road and tra-
velled along the beach towards Tamatave. Towards
evening they became hungry, but could not find fresh
water to boil their rice. After a time they remembered
they had some manioc with them, and said to one another,
““'Why should we remain so hungry, while we have with
us some manioc, and a tinder-box to strike fire?”’

They sat down, kindled a fire, roasted the manioc, were
rauch refreshed, and remembered those words, ‘* Man
shall not live by bread alone,” Matt.iv. 4. Towards the
evening they found, near Andavamenarana, water, though
somewhat brackish, and boiled their rice.’ Presently
again they saw the two men who had given them so much
anxiety, on.the road, coming behind them. They agreed
to quit the path along the beach and turn into the path
in the jungle, where people usually proceed, thinking, if
the men saw them keep on the beach, it might increase
their suspicions.

After getting out of the sight of the men, they remained
quietly till they had passed. Night came on, but though
tired, they thought it best to continue travelling, as the
government letter-carriers were numerous in the neigh-
bourhood ; and as they took the path in the jungle, it
seemed best for our friends to proceed along the beach,
which they did, now, the eighth night since they left the
capital. .

_ They rested in the morning in a retired spot, and then
N
266 HUNGER.

advanced as rapidly as they could through the day, and
after dark lay down to rest. Long before daylight they
proceeded, as they knew they were sleeping near a village
in which soldiers resided.

Our party was by this time so tired, and their feet so
much swollen, they could scarcely move. Some could
scarcely keep up with the rest, and then by some acci-
dent passed beyond them unawares, and so missed each
other; it was providential they met again, for, as they
could not trace each other by the footsteps on the sand, it
led the party in advance to suspect the others were be-
hind. About mid-day they came opposite Tranomaro and
sent one of the servants to buy rice; a very small quantity
could be obtained, and only at an enormous price. There
were few people in the village, all had gone to the “ fa-
nompoana,” and the village appeared forsaken. Their
journey was drawing to an end, and they were aware that
the risk of being discovered was greater as they ap-
proached nearer to Tamatave. They resolved on sending
forward the two servants to the friend who had kindly
promised to receive them into his house and conceal
them till the vessel arrived. They remained concealed in
the jungle though without food. They continued there
all next day and durst not venture into the village.
Hunger increased, and they had no prospect of relief till
the servants returned. Towards evening, after being
more than a night and a day without food, they re-
collected having some stale fat with them which they had
brought to feed the lamp. In their extremity they boiled
it, ate it, thanked God for it, and reflected on all his
goodness to them in snatching them as brands out of the
HOPE. 267

burning, and his care over them in supplying them while
in confinement, in slavery, and in concealment. ‘‘ When
we brought this supply for our lamp with us,” said they,
““we no more thought of using it in an extremity for
food than the children of Israel thought of receiving
manna when they set out on their journey from Egypt.”

Next morning the servants returned from the friend
who had promised to conceal them ; they were anxious to
know what kind of reception and encouragement they
had met with, for their safe escape from the country
seemed to depend on that. They instantly asked: the
servants smiled, and said, “ All is right; there is indeed
a God, and he prepared the way before us. We delivered
the letter to the friend, and he understood it immediately,
and asked us where you were: we told him.” “Go
pack,” said he, ‘take them to such a place, and leave
them there; then come and tell me and I will take
my canoe and carry them across the lake after dark.
This is a dangerous place, there are many soldiers here
guarding every spot. Tell them to take courage, and I
will do all I can for them ; and as long as I am safe they
will be safe.” It was no small comfort, also, that they
had brought some rice, for our friends had been now
nearly three days without any thing to eat. About sun-
set they proceeded to the place where the canoe was to
meet them, and sent one of the servants to say they had
arrived. Here they had nearly committed themselves.
A man going along in a canoe saw them and came to see
what they were doing. They thought he was the person
that was coming to take them across, and were so over-
joyed that they nearly divulged their secret. Some of

n2
268 RECEPTION NEAR TAMATAVE.

them soon found out the mistake and tried to rectify it by
offering the man some food, and by so doing led him to
conclude that they had turned out of the usual path into
this private spot merely to eat. He refused, and rowed
away. Soon after, a person, accompanied by the servant
they had sent, came, and they were all taken into the
canoe, and conveyed safely to the house of the friend who
had promised to take them in. And none can describe,
say they, the joy and gratitude they felt when they found
themselves safe in the house of a friend. He received
them with the greatest kindness, asked them about the
dangers they had encountered, and gave them food to eat.
They then read together the sixteenth chapter of John,
and sang, though not in a high tone to be heard, a
hymn of praise to God. After some further conversa-
tion, he told them, much to their comfort, of the plans
formed for their escape. ‘‘ Do not grieve,” said he ;
“for Mr. Johns and myself have arranged all that con-
cerns you, and I expect the vessel here in about ten days ;
you will remain in my house, and though I cannot be
often with you, as business calls me away, I shall leave
my nephew with you to provide you food; whatever you
want, tell him, and J shall do all I canto make you com-
fortable and to put you safely on board.” Soon after
their arrival, there was some suspicion that the Europeans
were about to attack Tamatave; but their friend told
them that he would see them on board before it took
place, and desired them to hold themselves ready at his
call. He lived at some distance from the spot where
they were concealed. One night he sent a confidential
person to fetch some things from the place where they

SAVED BY A SHOWER. 269

remained. This person misunderstood him, and thought
he was to bring them; they set out with him, and never
had Providence appeared more clearly in their protection
than that night. They followed their guide till they came
close to the port; at that time a very heavy shower of
rain was falling, and they passed on to their friend’s
house. He was amazed when he saw them, and asked how
it was they had come without being sent for. The mis-
take was soon explained. What to do with them was the
question ; there was no place of concealment there, and
the only alternative was to return to their former hiding
place, though it was far more dangerous to do so than
they had apprehended. He set out to lead them back
from whence they came, and as they were going out of
the village,.ten or twelve men instantly surrounded them
and asked where they were going. Their friend had told
them previously not to speak, but let him speak, should
any attempt to stop them, consequently he replied and
said, “‘ that he and his friends were going to his country
place on business.” He was a man of influence and well
known, and no one suspected him, so that all were al-
lowed to pass. The men that had surrounded them were
the guards, and had it not been for the heavy shower of
rain which fell when they were passing by this very spot
just before, which had driven the guard into their houses,
they would no doubt have been caught. They safely
reached their resting place. Next morning their friend
returned home, and desired them to remain till he sent
for them. In a few days the expected ship arrived, and
after taking in her cargo and being ready to sail, their
kind friend sent a confidential person to tell them, asa
270 EMBARKATION.

precautionary measure, to cut their hair, and then to follow
the guide to the port at Tamatave. It was getting dark
when they left the house; they hastened on, with many
an anxious step, till their guide brought them to the jungle
near the port, where he left them for a short time, that he
might announce to their friends, the party that had en-
gaged to take them on board, that they had now reached
the spot. Their friends came, with a suit of sailor’s
clothes for each, as the most effectual means within their
reach of evading suspicion. They put them on in the
jungle. This was now a most critical moment. Within
a few minutes they must, after all their escapes, either be
detected, or they would be beyond the reach of detection.
One of the party concerned for their escape went to the
guards at the landing-place to amuse them with some
tales, while the others took our friends privately on board.

The ship weighed anchor early next morning and
sailed for Mauritius. Having got fairly out to sea, these
Christian refugees said to one another, “ Let us now,
like Abraham’s servant, bless the Lord, for he has pros-
pered our journey and granted us our request. Blessed
be the God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,”
said they, ‘“ who has not left us to perish by the hand of
the enemy. Our souls are escaped like a bird from the
snare of the fowler.”

Having thus seen our fugitive friends safely embark
at Tamatave on their way to Mauritius, we may perhaps
venture to linger a little while on the coast of Madagas-
car, notwithstanding the anger of the Queen at the escape
of any of her subjects from her grasp, and present a
brief notice of the history of Ramiandrahasina, who so
HISTORY OF A FRIEND. 271

effectually aided the concealment and escape of the re-
fugees, and who is himself at present at Mauritius.

The father of Ramiandrahasina was a civil officer,
called Vadintany, in the time of Radama. He left the
capital to reside on the coast at Tamatave, taking with
him his son, who was at that time of tender years. On
the death of the father, the son succeeded him in office,
and was ultimately constituted a judge and a colonel in
the army, a combination of offices neither very common
nor very desirable.

He had a pious relative, who became extremely anx-
ious on account of his spiritual welfare, and proved the
means, after persevering exertions, of the conversion of
Ramiandrahasina, some time prior to the suppression of
Christianity in the country. When the Queen issued her
order that all the Bibles, &c. in possession of the natives
should be returned to the government, he resolved on
retaining his at all risks. He resided in a house belong-
ing to the government at Tamatave, and prepared a place
under the floor of the house in which he might conceal
them. Being required to remove suddenly from the
house in consequence of some other arrangements, he
was compelled to leave his books where he had secreted
them, and was in daily apprehension of their discovery,
which of course would lead to his condemnation.

The oppressive measures adopted by the government,
and which by virtue of his office he was compelled to
assist in executing, created the deepest distress of mind.
He was obliged to associate with the officers and judges,
and to exact fines from the people, against which his
whole heart burnt with honest indignation. On one
272 RAMIANDRAHASINA.:

occasion he was employed by his superiors to compel
some people to pay a fine, simply because, in repairing a
battery, they had appeared somewhat discontented and
sullen, and had not, in fact, shouted the national sound
of joyful gratification while performing their laborious
and unwelcome task! Was it unnatural that a man pos-
sessing any of the common feelings of humanity should
long to escape from the fangs of such an intolerant and
merciless government? The only wonder is, that so
many should so long submit to such cruelty and tyranny.
Could they place confidence in one another, and rally
round a leader of common sense and independent mind,
the galling yoke would be instantly burst from their necks.

Still, Ramiandrahasina had no plan nor intention of
escaping or attempting to escape from the country, till
some time after he had aided in the escape of the refugees.
How kindly and effectually he assisted them has been
already mentioned, and need not be repeated.

It was some time after the fugitives were gone that he
found their Wscape was a subject of conversation with
the traders and some of the natives at Tamatave, the
latter of whom intimated to him rather broadly their
thoughts on the affair. He then perceived that the only
plan left to him of preserving his life and that of his
nephew (James) would be to escape to Mauritius before
they might be apprehended. He accordingly engaged a
passage for himself and his nephew, and reached the
Mauritius in November, 1638, having paid the expenses
from his own resources, as well as the passage of two of
his attached servants who could not be induced to sepa-
rate from him.
THE CHRISTIANS DESIRE TO ESCAPE. 213

Since his arrival, he has been employed by Mr. Baker,
the Society’s Missionary printer at Mauritius, where his
Christian character remains unblemished, and his time
is usefully occupied in acquiring such knowledge in the
arts of printing and bookbinding as may be, it is hoped,
.of very essential service in the future stages of the mis-
sion, when an entrance into Madagascar shall be again
provided. ,

It should perhaps be stated, that in escaping from
Madagascar, the Christians were but accomplishing their
own expressed and most earnest wishes. It is not that
their European friends had urged them to the measure.
To these belongs neither the commendation nor the cen-
sure attaching to the plan. The following is a deeply
affecting and interesting extract from a joint letter, on the
subject of escaping from the country, written by a con-
siderable number of natives, and addressed to the Rev.
D. Johns, dated 28th July, 1838.

“ We visit you with a letter, for this, which we now hold in
our hands, will come to your hands. We received your letter
sent us by our mutual friend, Joseph. You say you desire to see
us, and that though our path be difficult, it is the road to eternal
life. Thanks be to God for having given you strength to declare
this path to us, and for giving us an ear opened to hear. We
can now say as the Samaritans did: ‘Now we believe, not be-
cause of thy saying, for we have heard him ourselves and know
that this ia the Christ, the Saviour of the world.’

‘¢ When Christian saw Apollyon coming to meet him, he began
to tremble and hesitated whether to stand his ground or return ;
but considering he had no armour for his back, and that turning
back might give his enemy an advantage in piercing him, he re-
solved to stand. This expresses our state of mind.

“We have also this to say; you have been the means of saving

our souls from the second death. We cannot hesitate, then, to
tell you our temporal circumstances; for, as the Saviour said,

n3
274 THE CHRISTIANS DESIRE TO ESCAPE.

‘Who is our father, mother, sister, or brother, but those who
hear the word of God and keep it?’ We therefore explain to
you what our condition is, that, if possible, you may do something
to relieve us. We say, if possible, for our Saviour himself em-
ployed that expression in his prayer to his Father: ‘If it be
possible, let this cup pass from me.’

“ That you may know our wish, read Matt. x. 23, ‘ When they
persecute you in this city, flee ye to another ;’ and 1 Sam. xxvii.
1,2; David said, ‘There is nothing better for me than that I
should escape into the land of the Philistines; and Saul shall
despair of me to seek me any more in any coast of Israel,’ &c.
We leave it with you to decide, for you know best, whether you
can do anything for us in that way or not.

*«P.S. Please to send us some Spelling Books, and farewell
till death.” ‘

To such an appeal there could be but one response—
a resolution to assist them in effecting their escape. The
attempt was made ; and on behalf of a few it has happily
proved the means of preserving a portion of the “leaven,”
by which a large part of Madagascar is yet, it may be
hoped, to be leavened.
‘¢ THE BUSINESS IS OVER.” 275

CHAPTER XI.

From the Embarkation of the Refugees at Tamatave to their
Arrival in England. —Reception there, and Residence to the
present time.—Condition of the Christians remaining in Ma-
dagascar.—Letter from the Refugees in England to their suf-
fering Brethren in Madagascar.—Conclusion.

No sooner were our friends safely on board the vessel
destined to convey them from the shores of Madagascar
to Mauritius, than the captain congratulated them on
their escape in the well known native phrase, most ex-
pressive and heart-cheering to a Malagasy, “* Efa Kabary,”
“the business is over,”’—“ ’tis all safe.” They were now
beyond the reach of their pursuers and the grasp of the
Queen. Filled with indescribable emotions of devout
gratitude, they asked the captain if they might be per-
mitted on board his ship to unite in offering a song of
praise to God for their deliverance. Their request was
immediately complied with, and the captain and crew
listened with evident pleasure to this simple but sincere
expression of their devout feelings.

The vessel was bound in the first instance to the island
of St. Mary, lying a few miles off the north-eastern coast
of Madagascar, opposite to the Bay of Antongil. They
remained there ten or twelve days, and received great
kindness from many of the French residents.

They reached Port Louis, Mauritius, on Sunday, 14th
of October, 1838, were kindly permitted to land at once,
276 MALAGASY IN MAURITIUS.

without any local or official impediments, and found
themselves in the midst of those who delighted to express
their sympathy with them, and to show them hospitality.
Joseph suffered severely from an attack of fever, which
lasted about a fortnight, during which time he was
promptly and gratuitously attended by Dr. Montgomery,
a medical friend in Port Louis.

It is believed that there are not fewer than 10,000 of
the natives of Madagascar living in Mauritius, most of
whom were either originally imported as slaves, or brought
there by ships as ‘‘ prize negroes,” or are the descendants
of such. They now form a valuable and important class
of free labourers on the island. Many of them came
daily to visit our Christian refugees, and expressed the
kindliest feelings towards them. Our friends embraced
the opportunity of conversing with them on the great
subjects of religion, and could not be otherwise than
gratified and encouraged by the attention with which they
were listened to.

The expenses attending their passage from Mada-
gascar to Mauritius were kindly and spontaneously met
by the Christian friends of the latter island, among whom
it is but just to specify Colonel Jones and his Lady, Co-
lonel Buckler, Colonel Haslewood, Captain Fitzgerald,
T. S. Kelsey, Esq., Rev. L. Banks, Rev. J. Le Brun,
Mr. Icery, Mr. Baker, and many others; and especially
Lieutenant Turner, by whom the sum of nearly 904.
sterling was collected for the above objects, and to assist
in meeting the expenses of their voyage to England.

After remaining some time in Mauritius, it was sug-
gested and recommended by several pious and intelligent
VOYAGE TO THE CAPE. 277

friends there, that it was desirable to take the refugees
forward to England, where they might have an oppor-
tunity of acquiring the English language and obtaining
-much general knowledge to qualify them for future use-
fulness in Madagascar, as native teachers, should Provi-
dence open a door for their return to their native country.
With their moral and spiritual qualifications for such
service, our friends at the Mauritius were daily more and
more satisfied, by all the interviews and conversations
they had with them through the medium of the Mission-
.aries. They saw them after being tried by the fires of
persecution, and cherished the hope that they were spared
for some eminent good to Madagascar, in days yet to
come.

After much deliberation, it was resolved to. take
them forward, at any rate, as far as the Cape of Good
Hope, and there to be guided by the advice of the Rev.
Dr. Philip. Before finally arranging for their departure,
Andrianilaina and Razafy (Sarah) came to the resolution,
however painful might be the execution of it, of separat-
ing for a season, in attempting to accomplish important
objects on behalf of the persecuted Christians yet in Ma-
dagascar. They proposed that the husband should re-
main in Mauritius and the wife go forward with the party
to the Cape or England. It was faithfully explained to
them, and repeatedly too, that such a separation would
prove a great additional trial to them, and a very painful
one. They replied, that they had carefully deliberated on
the whole affair ; that they had earnestly prayed for Divine
direction, and had come finally to the resolution stated,
especially on the ground that it was Andrianilaina’s
278 ANDRIANILAINA REMAINS.

intention not to remain long at Mauritius, but to embrace
an early opportunity of attempting to assist in rescuing
some of his persecuted friends, by means which it would,
for obvious reasons, be unadvisable to specify at present.
He urged this as a reason why he thought it much better
’ that his wife should go forward than remain with him
for the time, since, in the attempt he was contemplating,
she would not be able to accompany him; and as they
must then separate for an indefinite period, they preferred
separating at once, while she could continue in the com-
pany of Rafaravavy. It seemed desirable too, that in so
long a voyage, Rafaravavy should not be without a female
companion ; to which it was added, that these two pious
women had been all along partakers of each other’s trials
and sufferings ; they had wandered about together in their
places of concealment, and, without the most imperative
necessity, would be unwilling to part from one another
till some favourable change should transpire in reference
to their country. Andrianilaina observed also, that he
thought it would be sufficient if one of them only went to
England, because that one could learn the language, and
on returning, might teach the other.

Their wish was at length complied with, and it was
arranged that six of the refugees, in company with the
Rev. D. Johns, should proceed to the Cape of Good Hope,
and that Andrianilaina should remain. The latter ac-
cordingly made Mauritius his home for a time, devoting
himself to the instruction of his countrymen there in the
way of salvation. He has since been busily employed in
trying to accomplish the scheme referred to, the result of
which is not yet known.
HOTTENTOTS AND MALAGASY. 279

On the 2nd of December the party left Mauritius, and
reached Algoa Bay on the 23rd, where they remained a
fortnight. Here, too, they found much Christian kind-
ness. The Rev. Mr. Robson and Mrs. Robson, of Port
Elizabeth, provided accommodation for the four young
men, and Mr. and Mrs. Chick, formerly of the Mada-
gascar Mission, for the two women. Our refugee friends
began to feel almost at home again in company with the
latter and Mr. Kitching, whom they had so intimately
known in Madagascar.

The Hottentot Christians at Port Elizabeth expressed
a very deep and affectionate interest in our friends. They
frequently paid them a visit, and having met with a native
of Madagascar who had long lived in South Africa, and
knew both the Dutch and Malagasy languages, they
hoped to find in him a valuable medium of communica-
tion. They tried this some time, but found it did not
succeed very well: the man was ignorant on religious
subjects and cherished no interest in their conversation.
They then adopted another, and in some respects more
effectual, as well as novel, mode of communication. The
Hottentots had their Dutch Bibles, the Malagasy had
theirs in their native language, and as both wished to ex-
press their sorrow that they could not understand one
another’s speech, they both very naturally and very ap-
propriately turned to the same passage in their Bibles,
and read Genesis xi. 1—7, being the account of the “ con-
fusion of languages at Babel,” in which they saw at once
the origin of the perplexity and trouble they were now in
from a difference of speech.

The Hottentots, having read the passage attentively,
280 CONVERSATION BY THE SCRIPTURES.

begged the interpreter to say for them, how grieved they
were that they could not converse with them, but that
their hearts were full of love to them. ‘ Do not fear,”’
said they; ‘‘you are now among friends! Our fathers
were once cruel and savage, murdering strangers and de-
vouring them: but God has had compassion on us, and
sent us missionaries who have taught us concerning Jesus
Christ.”” They then requested their Malagasy friends to
read Ephesians ii. 2—5: “ Among whom we all had our
conversation in times past, and were by nature children of
wrath ;—but God, who is rich in mercy, has raised us up ;
—by grace are ye saved.” The refugees were delighted
with these expressions, and then pointed their Hottentot
friends to Eph. ii. 14, 15: ‘ For he is our peace who
hath made both one, and hath broken down the middle
wall of partition between,” &c. ; and to Gal. iii. 28: “ Ye
are all one in Christ Jesus.”

On another occasion the Hottentots came and referred
our friends to John xvi. 33; ‘In the world ye shall have
tribulation, but be of good cheer; I have overcome the
world.” 2 Tim. iii. 12; “ All that will live godly in
Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution.” Acts xiv. 22;
“ Exhorting them to continue in the faith, and that we
must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of
God.” To these suitable texts our Madagascar friends
replied by referring them to Rom. viii. 3s—39; ‘‘Who
shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribula-
tion, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness,
or peril, or sword? Nay, in all these things we are more
than conquerors through Him that loved us,”. &c.

_ Their intercourse was continued in this manner as long
THE REFUGEES IN CAPE TOWN. 281

as the refugees remained in Port Elizabeth, and during
that short time the parties formed a remarkably strong
attachment to each other; such as will probably continue
through life itself, though they may probably never see
each other again.

When the vessel was about sailing, the Hottentots came
to the apartments of our friends and united with them in
singing ahymn. Their hearts were one and the tune
was the same, but the hymn and the language were dif-
ferent. They accompanied each other to the beach, and,
while waiting for the boat, commended each other in
prayer to God, and parted with warm affection and
many tears.

The friends here generously raised about 12/. towards
their expenses, of which sum the Hottentots cheerfully
contributed their portion, for there was already a willing
mind, and amidst deep poverty their piety shone in the
riches of their liberality.

On their arrival at Cape Town, they were welcomed
most kindly by the friends of missions there, and espe-
cially by their old friend Mr. Cameron, late of Mada-
gascar. Dr. Philip was at the time on a visit in the
interior of the colony, and the party remained about six
weeks awaiting his return home. As many of their
countrymen were living at the Cape, who had been for-
merly imported as slaves from Madagascar, the refugees
endeavoured to make themselves useful among them by
conversation, reading the Scriptures, and public ad-
dresses.

On Dr. Philip’s return home, he entered con amore
into the subject ; and, after having heard the whole affair,
282 ARRIVAL IN LONDON.

and having had much conversation with the fugitives
through an interpreter, he strongly and unhesitatingly
advised their being taken forward to England. Arrange-
ments were now made without delay for their embarka-
tion. A few days prior to their departure, Dr. P. invited
them to spend an afternoon with him, and that afternoon
will long be remembered by the refugees. He addressed
them with affection and sympathy, and warned, admo-
nished, and counselled them on the spiritual dangers be-
fore them. The suggestions offered were founded on a
deep and extensive knowledge of human nature, and felt
to be most appropriate to their circumstances. They were
conveyed with so much feeling and earnestness, that, to
use their own expression, they went down to the very
depths of their hearts.

On retiring to their lodgings, they united in committing
to paper the advice they had received, and each one took
a copy for himself, which they have often read and always
value.

The Christian friends at the Cape generously raised a
sum of 40/. and those at Graham’s Town 20/. towards
the expenses incurred by the voyage of the refugees.

They reached England at the end of May, 1839. Ten
thousand British voices badé them welcome to England’s
shores, counting it an honour to show kindness to them,
for the very sufferings which they had endured for the
Saviour’s sake. They were presented to the Directors of
the London Missionary Society, at a meeting of the
Board, as soon as practicable after their arrival, and
found in them cordial and affectionate sympathy. A
public meeting was then held at Exeter Hall, for the
EXETER HALL. 283

purpose of introducing them to the Christian community,
publicly receiving them under the protection of the so-
ciety, and enlisting on their behalf the prayers of many.
It was a meeting of deep and solemn interest, scarcely,
if ever, exceeded, on any former occasion within those
walls. In the refugees, the friends of missions present
beheld some of the fruits of their labours, the triumphs
of the Gospel, and the power of principle. The recital
of the sufferings they had endured and the steadfastness
they had displayed, awakened the recollection of the
days of primitive Christianity, and of the struggles of
the noble army of martyrs in our own land. And that
very recollection served but to awaken a feeling of more
ardent gratitude to God for the liberty and the privileges
which Britain now enjoys, and to inspire a holy resolu-
tion of promoting throughout the world the religion of
the Cross, as involving all the best and noblest interests
of the human family.

Many of the churches and congregations of our
country have had an opportunity of seeing one or more
of the refugees since their arrival in England, and every-
where has a lively interest been created in their favour,
and through them, on behalf of the great work of Chris-
tian missions.

Our friends have continued to reside at Walthamstow,
and are all united in Christian fellowship with the church
under the pastoral charge of Mr. Freeman. Mrs. Johns
has the immediate care and superintendence of Rafara-
vavy and Razafy; and the four young men reside with
the master of the British and Foreign School in the
village, at which they attend as a means of improvement
284 STATE OF MADAGASCAR

in the English language and of acquiring general know-
. ledge. ‘

They continue to entertain the hope that they may one
day be permitted to return to their own country, and aid in
the dissemination of Christianity among their countrymen.
The success of the gospel in their own country is the object
nearest to their hearts—an object of daily prayer and so-
licitude. Recent tidings, however, afford no ground to
anticipate any immediate opportunity of restoring them
to their own land. The enmity of the native government
against Christianity has become more virulent than ever :
its professors in Madagascar are scattered, hunted, and
denounced with most determined and unrelenting hos-
tility.

More than a year and a-half having elapsed since our
friends sailed from the shores of their country, it may be
proper, before closing this volume, to glance for a mo-
ment at the events which have occurred there during
that period, affecting the state of the Christians still on the
island. How many there actually are to whom that name
applies, and where they are in the country, it would be
difficult to state; and if it were practicable, it would be
highly dangerous to them to do it.

An eminently pious young woman, about thirty years
of age, was apprehended at the time of the martyrdom of
Rafaralahy, and for her profession of religion was sold
into perpetual slavery. Her husband had previously di-
vorced her, and her father had sternly and peremptorily
shut his door against her, on account of her having be-
come a Christian. Her relations were all indignant and
felt themselves doubly disgraced, first, by her being in
SINCE THE REFUGEES LEFT IT. 285

slavery, and secondly, by her adherence to this new re-
ligion in opposition to the Queen’s laws. They preferred
that she should die rather than thus disgrace them, and
accordingly made application to the first officer to take
her into his service, requesting, however, that she might
first be put to the ordeal of tangena. He assented to the
arrangement; the tangena, strongly against her inclina-
tion, was administered to her, and she perished. In
chronological order Ravahiny may be regarded as the
third martyr of Madagascar.

Many of the Christians who had effected their escape
to a distance from the capital, but not out of the country,
have continued to suffer innumerable hardships and diffi-
culties to the present time. Some, it is thought, have
perished through extreme fatigue, hunger, nakedness,
disease, and anxiety.

About the time our friends sailed from Tamatave, a
fresh storm of persecution was breaking out, of which,
however, they did not hear till after their arrival in
England. Three women were accused of meeting for
prayer. Two of these are wives of two of the young men
now in England. A man was sent to apprehend them.
It happened that two only were present at the time,
namely, Razanaka, the wife of Simeon, and Ratsaramia-
rana. David’s wife, Raminahy, was not there. The man
sent to apprehend them found them reading the Scrip-
tures. It was dark, and Razanaka effected her escape.
Enraged at losing one of his victims, he beat with much
severity his remaining prisoner, and the copy of the
Bible, which she had concealed under her dress, hap-
pened to fall and was discovered. She was then taken
286 INHUMAN ORDERS ISSUED

to his house and beaten by six men, to induce her to give
up the names of her companions. This she nobly re-
fused to do, and was taken the next morning before the
chief officer, and again cruelly scourged, and ordered
to be scourged till she would state who had been her
associates. She suffered with the constancy of a martyr,
and sustained the repeated blows till she swooned with
pain and loss of blood. They then desiated, and she
was sold into perpetual slavery. She was subsequently
ordered to take the tangena, but contrived to escape
into concealment.

Raminahy and Razanaka, it is stated, effected their
escape to a desert part of the country, and are probably
still surviving, though in a state scarcely preferable to
death itself.

Affecting intelligence has been received within the
last few days from Madagascar, contained in letters
written by the persecuted natives themselves, from which
it appears that the Queen has issued orders to her soldiers,
who are in active pursuit of the fugitives, that they are
to put them to death at once, wherever they are found,
by digging a pit, tying them by the hands and feet,
thrusting them head downwards into the pit, and then
pouring boiling water on them till they perish.

This barbarous measure is adopted under a pretence
that the Christians must be guilty of sorcery, which they
have obtained from their European teachers, otherwise it
is impossible, say the members of the Queen’s govern-
ment, that they could so long elude their pursuers; and
that, as they possess such sorcery, it would be dangerous to
permit them even to be brought for trial to the capital,
AGAINST THE CHRISTIANS. 287

where the sovereign resides, as they might exercise some
fatal magical arts there; and hence they are to be
destroyea at once in the horribly inhuman manner
described.

Might not the humanity and Christian feeling of the
British public be appealed to on the behalf of these suf-
ferers? The letters of the natives themselves, who are
condemned to this appalling fate, are full of piety and
tenderness. Their appeal is strong and deeply affecting :
‘We have heard,” say they, “the orders of the Queen
respecting us, and in what manner we are to be put to
death if discovered; we still confide in the compassion of
the Saviour; but we ask, Can you do anything to rescue
us? We think of the death awaiting us. The spirit is
willing, but the flesh is weak.”

They could be rescued ; and the opinion of the writers
of this volume is, that no large amount of a pecuniary
kind would be requisite to effect it.

Murder by the ordeal of tangena is proceeding on a
large scale. The letters above alluded to, as recently
received, contain the fearful account, that on a late occa-
sion the ordeal had been administered to 600 persons,
and that Five Hundred of the number had perished !
Oh! the unutterable cruelties of the dark places of the
earth! The Arch-spirit of idolatry and superstition has
indeed been a murderer from the beginning.

Among the letters received from the natives within
the last few days, containing the afflictive statements just
given, is one, that exhibits so much of the genuine spirit
of religion, in its meekness, patience, and simplicity,
that it would be an injury to withhold it. It affords
288 NATIVE LETTER.

additional evidence that there is still a “ remnant” pre-
served, whose love to the Saviour even “ many floods
cannot extinguish.”

“ Antananarivo, 18 Adalo, 1839.
“10th October, 1839.

* To the Rev. J. J. FREEMAN, and Rev. D. Jouns.

“We come to visit you by a letter to ask you how you are ; for
we are still alive, and have an opportunity of writing to you,
through the blessing of God. This letter you will consider as a
substitute for ourselves ; we hope it will meet you, and your hands
will receive it as if it was our own hands. Blessed be God, who
is compassionate and exceedingly merciful; who hath given his
only begotten Son to be a ransom for us, that we might be de-
livered from eternal misery. And blessed be God, who sent you
and brought you to this country of Madagascar to preach the
Gospel and to proclaim Jesus the Saviour, and Christ the Re-
deemer, of all who believe in him. For the Apostle John says,
‘God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life.’ Yes, beloved friends, had it not been for the
mercy of God, we should not have known that. We entreat of
you, beloved friends, to cry every morning and evening to God
on our behalf, to bless our country, the government, and the
people, that they may be brought out of darkness and come to
the ‘Father of lights;’ that they may know the one true God
and Jesus Christ, the ransom of the guilty; that oppression may
cease, for they are now exceedingly dark for want of the know-
ledge of God and of the life to come, for the wickedness of this
country is like that of Sodom and Gomorrah; whether we
consider the afflictions of those Christians who conceal
themselves, or those who have not fled into concealment,
or whether we look at the afflictions of the people generally
throughout the country. Yes, beloved friends, we repeat the
request ; pray for us, that the word of the Lord may run and be
glorified in this country as it is with you, and that we may be
delivered from unreasonable and wicked men; for all men have
not faith. Yes, dear friends, great are our afflictions; it is the
wilderness we tread, and we are much straitened on both sides.
Jehovah alone preserves us; ‘For except. the Lord keep the city,
the watchman waketh but in vain,’ says the Psalmist. Be fervent
NATIVE LETTER. - 289

in your prayers for us, dear friends, that we may be enabled to
follow him, whether in prosperity or in adversity; that we may
have all confidence in Jehovah; for he says, ‘Cast thy burden
upon the Lord ;’ and also, ‘There is no condemnation to them
that are in Christ Jesus, and nothing can separate us from the
love of Christ.’ Yes, beloved friends, our trials and temptations
are many; the persecutions and the reproaches of the wicked
are great; but though they are many, yet we feel confident Je-
hovah is on our side, and if God is for us, who can be against us?
And we venture to say, ‘The Lord is my helper, and I will not
fear what man shall do unto me.’

‘‘We have seen what happened to the prophets and the an-
cients in former times, to Christ and his apostles, and all the
godly who have gone before us, and whose afflictions were far
more than ours; even Christ was afflicted! and what are we,
that are but grass and stubble, that we should plead exemption?
‘For if they do these things in a green tree, what shall be done
in the dry?’ ‘For even hereunto were ye called,’ says the

_ Apostle Peter. ‘For Christ also hath suffered for us, leaving us
an example, that we should follow in his steps.’ The Son of the
Most High himself sustained all these sufferings; much more
may we expect them. When Paul thought of the excellency of
Christ, he said, ‘I count all things but loss for the excellency of
the knowledge of Christ Jesus, for whom I have suffered the loss
of all things, and count them but dung that I may win Christ.’
Oh! beloved friends, that which is in our hearts makes us to be
afraid above all things, for ‘ the heart is evil above all things, and
desperately wicked.’ O! that the admonition of Paul may be
fixed in our hearts; ‘ Wherefore take unto you the whole armour
of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and
having done all to stand.’

“We received the ‘ Pilgrim’s Progress.’ O, what joy the re-
ception of it has given us! we are, indeed, delighted.

“ Those of our friends who have run away are still concealing
themselves in the deserts, and they send their kind salutation to
you; and O how we long to meet with you! but if we shall never
geet you again in this world, we shall meet you together in the
next.

- “ Say

«R———
** And his Companions.”

Our Malagasy refugees, deeply sympathizing with
ry
290 LETTER FROM THE REFUGEES

their afflicted and persecuted friends, have addressed to
them a letter of advice and consolation in the native
language, and which, through the kindness of some of
their exceedingly liberal and attentive friends at Wal-
thamstow, they have been assisted to print. A press and
fount of types have been obtained for their use, it being
thought that their knowledge of the art of printing might
be of service in the future history of the Madagascar
mission. At this press they have composed and printed
their letter as a short tract. It is wholly their own; nor
have they to this moment any idea whatever of its being
placed before the public; but as it may interest many
of the readers of this volume to see a translation of it
in English, it is inserted as follows.

A LETTER FROM THE Srx Maxtacasy REFUGEES, WHO HAVE
ESCAPED TO ENGLAND FROM THE PERSECUTION IN MAD~- .
GASCAR, ADDRESSED TO THEIR FRIENDS AND RELATIONS WHO
ARE STILL SUFFERING THERE.

‘‘ BELOVED FRIENDS IN THE LoRD,

‘May you enjoy health and happiness ; how have you
been since our separation from each other? Through the bless-
ings of God we are well. Although we are now far away from
you, and the vast ocean lies between us, we do not forget you,
for, when we approach God in prayer to seek bleesings on
ourselves, we also implore his blessing to rest on you; for the
blessings which are in Christ Jesus are sufficient for us and for
you. He is the exhaustless and unchangeable fountain of bless-
ings, and although thousands have been enriched by him from
the beginning of the world, bis fullness has continued the same
to this day. .

‘© We have, indeed, reached this country! a country wherein
multitudes live who are kind and compassionate,—the country
which first sent the word of God to our native land ;—a country
where multitudes serve God and keep his commandments,—a
country of liberty, where none are prohibited from -prayimg to
TO THEIR PERSECUTED FRIENDS. 291

the Lord of life, but all are permitted to meet and worship God
whenever and wherever they please, and especially. on the Sab-
bath day.

“ You remember, perhaps, those words of Jesus Christ ; ‘ Every
one that hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father,
or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my name’s sake,
shall receive an hundred. fold in this life, and in the world to
come life everlasting.’ This, in part, is fulfilled in our case ; for
since we left our native country, and parted with our dear re-
latives and friends, we have found friends a hundred fold in this
country, who have deeply sympathized with us in all our tribu-
lations and seek to do us good. Although we are thus happy in
the enjoyment of many mercies in this land, yet our hearts are
full of grief and sighing when we remember you with whom we
often united in prayer and praise, and who are still enduring
persecution; yes, we cannot forget you in your afflictions. We
cannot forget our native land, our relations and friends according
to the flesh, and those with whom we associated in our youth;
but how much less can we forget you who are one with us in
Christ. No, dear friends, we cannot forget you; we are partakers
of your sorrows and sympathize with you in your afflictions.
‘When we heard of your enduring cruel scourgings, we felt as if we
also had been scourged with you; when we heard of your being
subjected to hard and cruel labour, we felt as if we were under
your burdens; when we heard of your being compelled to leave
your homes, and without any settled abode, wandering about in
the wilderness, concealing yourselves in dens and caves of the
earth, exposed to the heat of the sun by day, and the cold air of
the night, we felt as if we were with you in all your journeys, and
taking a part in all your troubles.

“ Since our arrival in this country we have spent a whole day
sometimes.in fasting and prayer, pleading with God in your be-
half; but not for you alone do we pray, we plead also for the
Queen and those in power under her, entreating God to have
mercy upon them and to enlighten their understanding. Al-
though they have destroyed the people of God for worshipping
the Lord of life, and still persecute those that remain; and al-
though they reduced us and our wives into slavery and confis-
cated all our property, and subjected us to hard labour, to
scourging and bonds, and the wives of some of us are still per-
secuted in connexion with you, we do not feel resentment, our
bowels yearn over their ignorance and the blindness of their

o 2

eee
292 LETTER FROM THE REFUGEES

minds. We are overwhelmed with grief when we think of their
misery at the last day, if they change not nor repent of their re-
bellion against God and of their sin in putting the people of God
to death for worshipping and serving him according to his word.
We should feel more sorry for those who are guilty of shedding
the blood of our beloved friends than for our friends who were
martyred by them. Alas! how miserable and awful will be the
condition of those who have no part in Jesus Christ in the
future world! they will be punished in hell with everlasting
destruction. When we remember this, our souls are filled with
grief, and we are prompted to cry to God to change their
hearts; for our God is a merciful God, he sent his Son into the
world to save sinners; and though they are guilty of shedding
the blood of God’s people, if they repent of their sins Jesus
Christ will save them, for he hath said, ‘I came not to call the
righteous but sinners to repentance;’ and we are told, ‘ The
blood of Jesus cleanseth us from all sin.” We therefore cry to
God, if it be his will, to cause us and our persecutors to inherit
together eternal life, as Saul and Stephen are now in heaven.
This is not impossible, for that great mercy which was extended
to Saul and Manasseh is still the same, and the hand of Jehovah
is not shortened that it cannot save; this encourages us and the
people of God in this country to pray on behalf of our Queen,
and we beg of you also, beloved friends, do not forget to pray
that he may change her heart. Though she troubles you and
seeks your lives, be not resentful, but rather pity her, have com-
passion on her and pray for her, for we are commanded by Jesus
Christ, ‘to love ‘our enemies,. to bless them that curse us, to do
good to them that hate us, and to pray for them who despitefully
use us and persecute us.’

‘‘ Our fathers in the gospel, Messrs. Freeman and Johns, have
showed us more kindness than we are able to express. You saw
their conduct, their works and labours, while living amongst us
in our native land; how they, when we were accused, exposed
their lives to save us. And from what we have seen of their de-
sire and efforts to do good to our native country and to save your
lives, and their sympathy with you in your afflictions since our
arrival here, we are compelled to say that their bodies only are
in this country, but their hearts are still in owr country.

“The apostle Paul says, ‘ Whether one member suffer, all the
members suffer with it; or one member be honoured, all the
members rejoice with it.’ So it is with us and the people of God

ee a ee
TO THEIR PERSECUTED FRIENDS. 293

in this country ; we all sympathize with you and feel for you, and
therefore pray fervently day and night for you. Some time ago,
those who love the Saviour in this country, devoted a part of
a day to united prayer, that God would open a door to preach the
gospel in our native land, and that he would give you strength
-secording to your day, and preserve you from the hands of those
who seek to destroy you. Be strong, beloved friends, and do
not be discouraged, these afflictions will not last long ; better
days are at hand; if you should not be delivered from them
while you continue in this world, in heaven you will be free
from them all. Remember Jesus’ words to his disciples: ‘In
the world ye shall have tribulation; but be of good cheer, I have
overcome the world.’ We again say, dear friends, be strong,
for these light afflictions which you now endure, work out for
you a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. They
are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be re-
vealed in you. Remember also, that ‘If we suffer with Christ,
we shall also be glorified together ; but if we deny him, he will
also deny us.’

‘¢ And in all your wanderings and afflictions be not dismayed,
for God is the rock of ages, upon him you can stand firm; he is
@ pillar, on him you can lean without fear; he is 2 shield and a
strong hold for you, and his word is a lamp to your feet; wait
for him and trust in him, and he will uphold you with the right
hand of his righteousness. He shall cover you with his feathers,
and under his wings shall you trust. He will gather you as a
hen gathereth her chickens under her wings; he will increase
your strength and will guide you even to death.

«And with respect to the hatred which the ungodly bear to-
‘wards you, remember that this has been the lot of God’s people
in every age of the world, for he that is born after the flesh per-
aecuteth him that is born after the spirit. The ungodly dislike the
conduct and the actions of the godly, this was the cause of Cain’s
hating his brother Abel: why did he hate him? because his
own deeds were evil and his brother's righteous.. The church of
Christ is represented.in the Scriptures as a bush burning with
fire, yet not consumed. This.was her condition while in Egypt,
when the king of that country caused the people to serve in hard
bondage, and ordered their new-born male infants to be put to
death. Such also was her state when the King of Babylon
brought the people of God. into captivity and destroyed their city,
and sold. them into slavery.. And believers in after ages were

03
294 LETTER FROM THE REFUGEES

also called to endure great hardships. Some had trials of cruel
mockings and scourgings, of bonds and imprisonments: they
were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted ; were slain
with the sword; they wandered about in sheep skins and goat
skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented; they wandered in
deserts and in mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth.
And from the time Paul wrote that epistle to the present, the
sufferings of believers have been universally the same ; numbers
have been killed in different countries, which shows that the
enmity of the ungodly against the people of God remains still
the same. And we are told that even in this country a long time
ago, many were killed for their love to Christ; but notwithstand-
ing this, they did not repent of having become the disciples of
Christ, for the Lord filled their hearts with that peace which the
world cannot impart nor take away. Persecution was the lot of
the devoted apostles of Christ, but they were supported under
them all. Paul says, ‘ We are troubled on every side, yet not
distressed ; we are perplexed, but not in despair ; persecuted, but
not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed.’ And we believe
that all who have suffered on account of their love to Christ,
since the days of the apostles, have found that the grace of Christ
has been sufficient to strengthen and enable them to bear all the
afflictions with which the ungodly have afflicted them. And we
sincerely hope that you also have found it so, for the God whom
you serve is no respecter of persons, but he freely gives to all
those who ask of him. Therefore, beloved friends, be strong in
your supplications to him; ask him to cause his face to shine
upon you, and to fill you with all joy and peace in believing,
that you may abound in hope, through the power of the Holy
Ghost. This will enable you to press forward with joy in your
Christian course, until you arrive at the celestial city, in the pre-
sence of that Saviour who gave his life a ransom for us. And
when once there, all troubles and trials will for ever end, for
nothing that causes trouble shall enter into that holy place;
there shall the righteous reap the fruit of their toils and labours:
for Jesus says, ‘To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with
me in my throne, even as I also overcame and am set down with
my Father in his throne.’ Many would venture to expose their
lives to the greatest danger if they had any hope of obtaining
earthly honours, and especially of obtaining a kingdom, though
that honour or that kingdom is perishable; but the honour and
the kingdom which we hope to obtain are incorruptible, unde-
TO THEIR PERSECUTED FRIENDS. 295

filed, and shall never fade away; therefore if we have, dear
friends, such a hope, ‘let us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness
of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.’
Let us bear the cross and follow Jesus Christ till death. Where-
fore, beloved friends, be steadfast, unmoveable, and increase
continually in the knowledge and love of the Saviour. Run
that you may obtain that crown which is set before you and pro-
mised to be given to them that love the Redeemer. We also
go forward in the strength of the Lord; we shall not cease to
follow after that crown till we shall enter into the everlasting
rest which is promised to the people of God. There we hope
to meet you, and hear from you of all the trials and afflictions
which you met on your journey, and shall then unite with you in
singing the song of Moses and the Lamb for ever.
“Mr. and Mrs. Freeman, Mr. and Mrs. Johns, unite with us
in Christian Jove to you all.
“ Say,

« RAFARAVAVY,

“ Razary,

“ ANDRIANOMANANA,

*¢ RaASOAMAKA,

“ RaTSARAHOMBA,

‘* ANDRIANIBA.”

CONCLUSION.

The details contained in this volume are left with the
readers for their own reflection. It appears to the writers
unnecessary and impertinent to expatiate on the facts.
The tale speaks for itself and contains its own lessons,
It shows how uniform are the plans of God in the go-
vernment of the world and in the affairs of the church.
As from the beginning, so to the present time, “ He that
is born after the flesh persecuteth him that is born after
the spirit.” Wherever genuine religion prevails, persecu-
tion in some form arises, and the heralds of the Cross
must everywhere stand prepared to meet it.

But God administers strength to his suffering people
296 CONCLUSION.

equal to their exigency. Not an instance of apostacy from
the faith, on account of the terrors of martyrdom, has yet
obscured the honour of the little band of believers in
Madagascar. The love of some has waxed cold. Mere
nominal professors have seceded from the ranks. Se-
ductive pleasures have perverted others; but, when
brought to the final test, no one has yet recanted—nor
renounced the Saviour’s name. ‘This is not of man, but
of God. It is He who has made all grace abound to-
wards them.

The hand of Divine Providence is seen in the care and
protection of our suffering friends. No one can fail to
recognise, in many instances described in the course of
this volume, the special care of his servants exercised by
** Our Father in heaven,” in harmony with the Saviour’s
assurance, ‘“* The very hairs of your head are all num-
bered.”

The sufficiency of the Scriptures, for the instruction
and consolation, the establishment and maturity of the
Christian character, is amply illustrated. in the circum-
stances narrated, and in the beautifully simple and affect-
ing letters from the native converts.

One great lesson which will force itself on the atten-
tion of the thoughtful reader of this volume is, that the
more simple and spiritual the aim of the missionary, and
the less the secular powers interfere with his work, the
greater and the purer will be the results obtained. The
connexion of the Madagascar mission with the native
government, even though necessitated in the first in-
stance, as explained in the course of the history, bas
proved one of the greatest. impediments to its success,
CONCLUSION. 297

by inducing the belief in many native minds that it was
merely a means of further oppression in the hands of a
government already too oppressive. And as to the pre-
sent measures, it need not be said that the opposition
of the government forms the one great difficulty in the
way of the extension of the gospel on the island.
Neither help us nor hinder us, is the cry of the mis-
sionary to all secular authorities; they simply ask, /et
us alone. The native power of truth and the blessing of
God are sufficient. Wherever religion prevails, it will
secure to governments better subjects, and to subjects
better rulers; but let the weapons employed to effect
either be spiritual in order to be effectual.

The cause of God will prevail. Barbarism, cruelty,
and inhumanity cannot destroy even the little leaven in
Madagascar. Pure and spiritual Christianity has pros-
pered there even amidst persecution. There are more
hearts on the side of Christ at this moment in Madagas-
car than there ever were. And there is hope for the
future. The blood of the martyr is there, the pledge of
the Saviour’s watchful care, and the seed of the church.
The prayers and tears of many water it. The harvest
will come, and Madagascar will be added to the king-
doms of our God and of his Christ.
EXPLANATION OF NAMES.

298

*paZinoos Ajataa28 uvwoOm Zunok se 8 oe * 9 ©  aysunqioj Suieq * * «* BUeIETUeIES}E yy
*suaBuvy, oy Aq yeep 07 ynd cs ee s 5 6 8 ¢ gofuensee °° ° © suryeary

. sof * 2 + * wosysafunofk > + * © Ayezere

qpeap 0} 3nd uaaq aaey 044 asous{ on Le ne gag so + + wurBpeseet

sof + © kyuedsoad Bunoodxa vUlsByeIpUBIWEY

‘SUTIN 38 O78 OMY asou{. oe ee qmop ss + 8 + cop poms * * BayRONpUY

*puvSug ur soaInjoy oy} ase xis aAoqge ayy,

°
.

“BUlstteapuBIey Jo uos pajdope * * ° * * sameps * * * © Sulmoyoar °° esruelapuy
_ hyvururey jo pusqang * ° * * ° praeg * * * daMoypoy [nyasn e * equioysiesyey
*sosey jo pueqsny * * * * ° ydasop * * ay8} 0) snoaseyuBApE °° * —- eyBuvoseyy
*eyeuezey jo pueqeng * * * * ‘uoauTg > * * © * Surssassod suBusMOUBLIpUy
seurepluelipuy jogim * ° * * * yuiegs * * * JuBpuadsap B oe 9 + hpezey
e + 6 6 6) kre * *¢  ° 10;y8nep ysaSunok c 2 9 kavavreyey

syIBUlayy satuen pajdopy ‘uorBoyUsig *aUIBN PAIBNT

*

-popuadde st suorjeuerdxa yy soMeNy JO 3st] SULAOT[Oy ayy eouasazoa Aewa Jo oyES ON} IO,

London: Printed by Witi1Am Ciowxs and Sons, Stamford Street.

PRESERVATION SERVICE

487 a4

SHELFMARK. @eeseeseversseeee

THIS BOOK HAS BEEN

MICROFILMED (199%)
NS.T.C.

MICROFILM NO SEE RPM

